1. Sleep Breath. 2024 Nov 28;29(1):18. doi: 10.1007/s11325-024-03193-z.

Short sleep time has a greater impact on the gut microbiota of female.

Gao F(#)(1), Ding L(2)(3), Du G(#)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical 
University, Haikou, China. 1438486432@qq.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, 
School of Basic Medicine and Life Sciences, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, 
China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hainan Medical University, 
Haikou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, 
School of Basic Medicine and Life Sciences, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, 
China. duguankui@163.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hainan Medical University, 
Haikou, China. duguankui@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Short sleep duration (SSD) affects people's health in 
multiple ways. This study attempted to explore the effect of SSD on the gut 
microbiota.
METHODS: In the American Gut Project Database, 361 individuals (without troubled 
by disease recently) with less than 6 h of sleep per day were obtained and 
matched with normal sleep time individuals according to gender, age, and BMI. 
Furthermore, the raw data of 16s rRNA in feces were downloaded and analyzed 
using QIIME2, and STAMP was used for data statistics. PICRUST2 was used for 
predicting the alteration of microbial function.
RESULTS: The SSD did not affect the microbial α-diversity. SSD increased the 
abundance of the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the families Rikenellaceae, 
Verrucomicrobiaceae, and S24-7, and decrased the Coriobacteriaceae. Moreover, 
PICRUST2 predicted that SSD affected 15 metabolic pathways. Subgroup analyses 
showed that SSD had more significant effects on the microbiota in normal-weight 
females.
CONCLUSION: SSD substantially modifies the abundance of specific gut microbiota 
taxa, exerting a pronounced influence particularly on females, highlighting the 
need for further investigation into the bidirectional relationship between sleep 
patterns and gut microbiota.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-024-03193-z
PMID: 39607448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: This article 
does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the 
authors. Conflict of interest: All authors certify that they have no 
affiliations.

1. Front Genet. 2024 Nov 12;15:1450064. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1450064. 
eCollection 2024.

Multi-omics insights implicate the remodeling of the intestinal structure and 
microbiome in aging.

Chen S(#)(1)(2), Wang C(#)(2), Zou X(2), Li H(2), Yang G(1)(2), Su X(2)(3), Mo 
Z(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Guangxi Medical University Cancer Hospital, Nanning, 
Guangxi, China.
(2)Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi key Laboratory for 
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(4)Institute of Urology and Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight 
infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as 
inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging 
remain unknown.
METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and 
old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial 
community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa 
were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human 
samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin 
between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was 
conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the 
key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of 
pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of 
different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced 
intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely 
targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile 
acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance 
of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels 
of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis 
identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most 
significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging.
CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions 
involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These 
findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel 
biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential 
therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2024 Chen, Wang, Zou, Li, Yang, Su and Mo.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1450064
PMCID: PMC11588687
PMID: 39600316

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Nov 10;12(11):2281. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12112281.

Unveiling Emerging Opportunistic Fish Pathogens in Aquaculture: A Comprehensive 
Seasonal Study of Microbial Composition in Mediterranean Fish Hatcheries.

Skliros D(1), Kostakou M(1)(2), Kokkari C(3), Tsertou MI(3), Pavloudi C(4), 
Zafeiropoulos H(5), Katharios P(3), Flemetakis E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Biotechnology, School of 
Applied Biology and Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, 11855 
Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Applied Microbial Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental 
Research-UFZ, 04318 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Institute of Marine Biology, Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Hellenic Centre 
for Marine Research, 71500 Heraklion, Greece.
(4)European Marine Biological Resource Centre-European Research Infrastructure 
Consortium (EMBRC-ERIC), 75252 Paris, France.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, Department of Microbiology, Immunology 
and Transplantation, Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium.

The importance of microbial communities in fish hatcheries for fish health and 
welfare has been recognized, with several studies mapping these communities 
during healthy rearing conditions and disease outbreaks. In this study, we 
analyzed the bacteriome of the live feeds, such as microalgae, rotifers, and 
Artemia, used in fish hatcheries that produce Mediterranean species. Our goal 
was to provide baseline information about their structure, emphasizing in 
environmental putative fish pathogenic bacteria. We conducted 16S rRNA amplicon 
Novaseq sequencing for our analysis, and we inferred 46,745 taxonomically 
annotated ASVs. Results showed that incoming environmental water plays a 
significant role in the presence of important taxa that constitute presumptive 
pathogens. Bio-statistical analyses revealed a relatively stable bacteriome 
among seasonal samplings for every hatchery but a diverse bacteriome between 
sampling stations and a distinct core bacteriome for each hatchery. Analysis of 
putative opportunistic fish pathogenic genera revealed some co-occurrence 
correlation events and a high average relative abundance of Vibrio, 
Tenacibaculum, and Photobacterium genera in live feeds, reaching a grand mean 
average of up to 7.3% for the hatchery of the Hellenic Center of Marine Research 
(HCMR), 12% for Hatchery A, and 11.5% for Hatchery B. Mapping the bacteriome in 
live feeds is pivotal for understanding the marine environment and distinct 
aquaculture practices and can guide improvements in hatchery management, 
enhancing fish health and sustainability in the Mediterranean region.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12112281
PMCID: PMC11596916
PMID: 39597671

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Oct 23;12(11):2119. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12112119.

Effect of the 16S rRNA Gene Hypervariable Region on the Microbiome Taxonomic 
Profile and Diversity in the Endangered Fish Totoaba macdonaldi.

Pérez-Bustamante IS(1), Cruz-Flores R(1), López-Carvallo JA(2), Sánchez-Serrano 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada 
(CICESE), Carretera Ensenada-Tijuana No. 3918, Zona Playitas, Ensenada 22860, 
Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Genética Marina, Departamento de Acuicultura, 
Facultad de Ciencias del Mar, Universidad Católica del Norte (UCN), Coquimbo 
1781421, Chile.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias Marinas, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California (UABC), 
Ensenada 22860, Mexico.

Understanding the intricate dynamics of fish microbiota through 16S rRNA 
amplicon sequencing is pivotal for ecological insights and effective disease 
management. However, this approach faces challenges including the 
co-amplification of host mitochondrial sequences and the variability in 
bacterial composition influenced by the selected 16S rRNA gene regions. To 
overcome these limitations, we conducted a comprehensive investigation to 
identify the most suitable 16S rRNA region for bacterial microbial analysis in 
endangered fish Totoaba macdonaldi, an endemic species of significant ecological 
and economic importance in Mexico. Targeting four distinct hypervariable regions 
(V1-V2, V2-V3, V3-V4, and V5-V7) of the 16S rRNA gene, we determined the 
microbial composition within the distal intestine. A total of 40 microbiomes 
were sequenced. Our findings underscore the critical impact of region selection 
on the accuracy of microbiota analysis. The V3-V4 region detected the highest 
number of bacterial taxa and exhibited significantly higher alpha diversity 
indices, demonstrating the highest taxonomic resolution. This study emphasizes 
the necessity of meticulous 16S rRNA region selection for fish microbiota 
analysis, particularly in native species of ecological and economic significance 
such as the endangered T. macdonaldi, where information is limited. Such 
optimization enhances the reliability and applicability of microbiota studies in 
fisheries management and conservation efforts.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12112119
PMCID: PMC11596169
PMID: 39597509

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2024 Nov 13;14(22):2536. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics14222536.

Utilizing Artificial Intelligence for Microbiome Decision-Making: Autism 
Spectrum Disorder in Children from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bašić-Čičak D(1), Hasić Telalović J(1), Pašić L(2).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, University Sarajevo School of Science and 
Technology, Hrasnička cesta 3a, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(2)Sarajevo Medical School, University Sarajevo School of Science and 
Technology, Hrasnička cesta 3a, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The study of microbiome composition shows positive 
indications for application in the diagnosis and treatment of many conditions 
and diseases. One such condition is autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We aimed to 
analyze gut microbiome samples from children in Bosnia and Herzegovina to 
identify microbial differences between neurotypical children and those with ASD. 
Additionally, we developed machine learning classifiers to differentiate between 
the two groups using microbial abundance and predicted functional pathways.
METHODS: A total of 60 gut microbiome samples (16S rRNA sequences) were 
analyzed, with 44 from children with ASD and 16 from neurotypical children. Four 
machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Classification, 
Gradient Boosting, and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier) were applied to 
create eight classification models based on bacterial abundance at the genus 
level and KEGG pathways. Model accuracy was evaluated, and an external dataset 
was introduced to test model generalizability.
RESULTS: The highest classification accuracy (80%) was achieved with Random 
Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier using genus-level taxa. The 
Random Forest model also performed well (78%) with KEGG pathways. When tested on 
an independent dataset, the model maintained high accuracy (79%), confirming its 
generalizability.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified significant microbial differences between 
neurotypical children and children with ASD. Machine learning classifiers, 
particularly Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier, achieved 
strong accuracy. Validation with external data demonstrated that the models 
could generalize across different datasets, highlighting their potential use.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics14222536
PMCID: PMC11592508
PMID: 39594202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. J Ginseng Res. 2024 Nov;48(6):581-591. doi: 10.1016/j.jgr.2024.08.001. Epub
2024  Aug 9.

Korean Red Ginseng alleviates dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis through gut 
microbiota modulation in mice.

Jeong JS(1), Baek GH(2), Kim JW(1), Kim JH(1), Chung EH(1), Ko JW(1), Kwon 
MJ(3), Kim SK(3), Lee SH(3), Kim JS(2)(4), Kim TW(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 FOUR Program), Chungnam National 
University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Nano-Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)R&D Headquarters, Korea Ginseng Corporation, Gwacheon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Institute for New Drug Development, College of Life Science and 
Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: There is a growing interest in understanding the association between 
the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such 
as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their 
ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on 
gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration 
in an experimental colitis model.
METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, 
the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological 
effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity 
index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the 
fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals 
in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted.
RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as 
indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and 
inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed 
that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and 
suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 
protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, 
was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal 
linings.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis 
by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, 
thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to 
elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of 
KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

© 2024 The Korean Society of Ginseng. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgr.2024.08.001
PMCID: PMC11584195
PMID: 39583173

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no known 
competing conflict of interest.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Nov 23;24(1):492. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03658-x.

Interpretation of bacterial composition patterns and community assembly 
processes in the rhizosphere soil of tea trees in karst areas.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Zhang N(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Ran W(1)(2), Zhao Z(1)(2), Song 
Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Karst Science, Guizhou Normal University, Guiyang, 550001, China.
(2)State Engineering Technology Institute for Karst Desertification Control, 
Guiyang, 550001, China.
(3)School of Karst Science, Guizhou Normal University, Guiyang, 550001, China. 
songyuehua@163.com.
(4)State Engineering Technology Institute for Karst Desertification Control, 
Guiyang, 550001, China. songyuehua@163.com.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Soil microorganisms that are closely related to 
plants are important factors affecting plant health. Therefore, elucidating the 
abundant and rare bacterial species in soil associated with plant diseases is 
crucial for understanding ecological processes, maintaining the stability of 
microecological environments, and formulating microbial strategies that are 
consistent with modern agricultural development.
RESULTS: Tea leaf blight leads to an increase in bacterial diversity in the 
rhizosphere. Random processes dominate the assembly of abundant and rare taxa, 
while abundant taxa are also influenced by deterministic processes. In the 
co-occurrence network, the increase in bacterial community diversity mediated by 
tea cloud leaf blight enhances the stability of the network. Meanwhile, the 
proportion of positive correlation between rare taxa is relatively high, and the 
relationship between rare taxa and intermediate taxa is closer. This highly 
diverse bacteria community maintained the structure and stability of the 
community to a certain extent.
CONCLUSION: The rare taxa in the rhizosphere and the rhizosphere bacterial 
community mediated by tea leaf blight have high diversity, which is of great 
significance for maintaining the stability of the rhizosphere bacterial 
ecological network. In the future, we will further explore the dynamic changes 
and interaction patterns of the species in the rhizosphere soil affected by tea 
tree diseases, and their ecological functions and importance in areas of habitat 
fragmentation. Overall, there are many microbial resources in the rhizosphere 
microbiota under the influence of plant diseases that can be used for 
agricultural practice. The results of this study will enrich the insights into 
ecodynamics of bacteria in karst areas, especially in karst tea gardens.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03658-x
PMCID: PMC11585092
PMID: 39578749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The source of experimental samples is collection, and the samples 
collected in the experiment have obtained permission from the tea garden 
managers. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The 
authors declare no competing interests.

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2024 Nov 21;24(1):1331. doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-10233-2.

Characterization of oral microbiota of children with hand, foot, and mouth 
disease caused by enterovirus A 71.

Shen N(#)(1), Wu R(#)(1), Lu T(#)(1), Jiang Y(1), Ning T(1), Liu S(1), Liu X(1), 
Zhu S(2), Qiao J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical 
University, Suqian, Jiangsu, 223800, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical 
University, Suqian, Jiangsu, 223800, People's Republic of China. 
zsyzsy7878@163.com.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical 
University, Suqian, Jiangsu, 223800, People's Republic of China. 826457@qq.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The association between alterations in the oral microbiome and hand, 
foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) has been observed in previous studies. Our study, 
therefore, aimed to identify the structural changes in the oral microbiota and 
biomarkers in children with HFMD caused by enterovirus A 71 (EV-A71).
METHODS: Children diagnosed with EV-A71 HFMD and healthy children recruited from 
April 2021 to September 2023 were included in the present study, and were 
categorized into EV-A71 and control groups, respectively. Oral swabs were 
collected and microbiota information was obtained using 16 S rRNA gene 
sequencing technology. Alpha-diversity and partial least squares discriminant 
analyses were conducted to compare microbial diversity, richness, and similarity 
between the two groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size was employed to 
identify microbial taxa with significant differences, and determined the key 
genera among them.
RESULTS: The study included a total of 80 children, with 50 assigned to the 
EV-A71 group and 30 to the control group. No significant differences were found 
between the two groups in terms of age (2.2 ± 1.2 vs. 2.7 ± 1.2 years; age 
range: 1-5 years; P = 0.114) or sex (56% vs. 60% boys, P = 0.726). The oral 
microbiota structure in the EV-A71 group differed from that in the control 
group. The EV-A71 group showed significant reductions in both the Shannon index 
(P = 0.037) and the abundance-based coverage estimator (ACE) index (P < 0.001). 
The key genus changes were marked by a significant decrease in the abundance of 
Capnocytophaga (P = 0.002) and Leptotrichia (P = 0.033) in the EV-A71 group.
CONCLUSION: In children with EV-A71 HFMD, the oral microbiota showed changes in 
composition, with a significant reduction in diversity and richness. The changes 
in key genera were a marked decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga and 
Leptotrichia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-024-10233-2
PMCID: PMC11583527
PMID: 39574007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics committee approval and 
consent to participate: The parents or guardians of the children included in the 
present study provided informed consent, and the study design was approved by 
the ethics committee of Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical University 
(June 14, 2020). All experiments were performed in accordance with guidelines of 
the Declaration of Helsinki (2013). Consent for publication: Not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2024 Nov 18;20(11):e1012577. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012577. eCollection 2024 Nov.

SPARTA: Interpretable functional classification of microbiomes and detection of 
hidden cumulative effects.

Ruiz B(1), Belcour A(1)(2), Blanquart S(1), Buffet-Bataillon S(3)(4), Le 
Huërou-Luron I(3), Siegel A(1), Le Cunff Y(1).

Author information:
(1)University Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France.
(2)University Grenoble Alpes, Inria, Grenoble, France.
(3)Institut NuMeCan, INRAE, INSERM, Univ Rennes, Saint-Gilles, France.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.

The composition of the gut microbiota is a known factor in various diseases and 
has proven to be a strong basis for automatic classification of disease state. A 
need for a better understanding of microbiota data on the functional scale has 
since been voiced, as it would enhance these approaches' biological 
interpretability. In this paper, we have developed a computational pipeline for 
integrating the functional annotation of the gut microbiota into an automatic 
classification process and facilitating downstream interpretation of its 
results. The process takes as input taxonomic composition data, which can be 
built from 16S or whole genome sequencing, and links each component to its 
functional annotations through interrogation of the UniProt database. A 
functional profile of the gut microbiota is built from this basis. Both 
profiles, microbial and functional, are used to train Random Forest classifiers 
to discern unhealthy from control samples. SPARTA ensures full reproducibility 
and exploration of inherent variability by extending state-of-the-art methods in 
three dimensions: increased number of trained random forests, selection of 
important variables with an iterative process, repetition of full selection 
process from different seeds. This process shows that the translation of the 
microbiota into functional profiles gives non-significantly different 
performances when compared to microbial profiles on 5 of 6 datasets. This 
approach's main contribution however stems from its interpretability rather than 
its performance: through repetition, it also outputs a robust subset of 
discriminant variables. These selections were shown to be more consistent than 
those obtained by a state-of-the-art method, and their contents were validated 
through a manual bibliographic research. The interconnections between selected 
taxa and functional annotations were also analyzed and revealed that important 
annotations emerge from the cumulated influence of non-selected taxa.

Copyright: © 2024 Ruiz et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012577
PMID: 39556595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. Life Sci. 2024 Nov 15;359:123244. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2024.123244. Online ahead
 of print.

Contributions of the gut microbiota to Gulf War Illness susceptibility: Findings 
from a mouse model.

Chaudhari DS(1), Francescutti DM(1), Winters AD(1), Koka O(1), Kracht DJ(2), 
Greenberg JM(1), Theis KR(3), Angoa-Perez M(4).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Service, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, 
MI, USA; Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Research and Development Service, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, 
MI, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Research and Development Service, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, 
MI, USA; Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: maperez@med.wayne.edu.

AIMS: In light of the evidence supporting a significant role of the gut 
microbiome in Gulf War Illness (GWI) pathology, we sought to examine its 
contribution to GWI susceptibility in a mouse model. We also aimed to identify 
bacterial taxa and microbially-derived metabolites associated with disease 
susceptibility.
MAIN METHODS: Male mice receiving pyridostigmine bromide (PB) orally, and 
controls were evaluated for symptoms of GWI at 8 weeks post-treatment. The 
Kansas criteria were adapted to assess behaviors associated with the following 
domains: gastrointestinal alterations, pain, mood, cognitive function, skin and 
respiratory disturbances. PB-treated subjects were classified into susceptible 
(GWI-S) or resilient (GWI-R). The status of the gut microbiome was assessed via 
analyses of the 16S rRNA gene and microbial-derived metabolites were evaluated 
with metabolomics tools.
KEY FINDINGS: Our results indicate that application of the Kansas criteria to 
behavioral outcomes in PB-treated mice resulted in a GWI susceptibility rate of 
~35 %, similar to the one reported in humans. The composition and structure of 
the gut microbiome was different in GWI-S subjects compared to both control and 
GWI-R mice at 8 weeks but differences in microbial community structure were 
observed prior to PB treatment between GWI-R and GWI-S mice. GWI-S subjects 
exhibited a pattern of differentially abundant bacterial taxa and microbial 
metabolites.
SIGNIFICANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first preclinical report in which a 
stratification by susceptibility to GWI and its association with the gut 
microbiome is described. In light of the research conundrum that vulnerability 
to GWI represents, the use of tools that could provide further insight into this 
complex factor should be considered.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2024.123244
PMID: 39551360

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Mariana Angoa-Perez reports 
financial support was provided by US Department of Defense. Mariana Angoa-Perez 
reports financial support was provided by US Department of Veterans Affairs. If 
there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Am J Infect Control. 2024 Nov 15:S0196-6553(24)00846-0. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajic.2024.11.006. Online ahead of print.

No detrimental effect on the hand microbiome of health care staff by frequent 
alcohol-based antisepsis.

Kramer A(1), Dahl MB(2), Bengtsson MM(2), Boyce JM(3), Heckmann M(4), Meister 
M(2), Papke R(1), Pittet D(5), Reinhard A(2), Slevogt H(6), Wang H(2), Zwicker 
P(1), Urich T(2), Seifert U(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany; Section Antiseptic Stewardship of the German 
Society of Hospital Hygiene e. V., Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Bacterial Physiology, University of Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(3)J.M. Boyce Consulting, LLC, Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany; DZKJ (German Centre for Child and Adolescent 
Health), partner site Greifswald/Rostock, Greifswald, Germany.
(5)Infection Control Programme and WHO Collaborating Centre on Infection 
Prevention and Control & Antimicrobial Resistance, University of Geneva, Faculty 
of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Hannover Medical 
School, German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Breath, Hannover, Germany; 
Respiratory Infection Dynamics Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(7)Section Antiseptic Stewardship of the German Society of Hospital Hygiene e. 
V., Berlin, Germany; Friedrich Loeffler-Institute of Medical 
Microbiology-Virology, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. 
Electronic address: ulrike.seifert@med.uni-greifswald.de.

BACKGROUND: The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health 
care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful 
data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome.
METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a 
leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at 
the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the 
hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. 
Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 
16S and 18S rRNA gene markers.
RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work 
shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. 
In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could 
be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day 
microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, 
longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the 
Eukaryotic community.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the 
composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains 
its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2024.11.006
PMID: 39551096

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Nov 15;24(1):476. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03626-5.

Correlation between intestinal microbiota and urolithin metabolism in a human 
walnut dietary intervention.

Liu H(1), Birk JW(2), Provatas AA(3), Vaziri H(2), Fan N(4), Rosenberg DW(5), 
Gharaibeh RZ(6)(7), Jobin C(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA.
(3)Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA. 
rosenberg@uchc.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Raad.Gharaibeh@medicine.ufl.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Raad.Gharaibeh@medicine.ufl.edu.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Christian.Jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA. Christian.Jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.
(10)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA. Christian.Jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.

This study is to investigate the relationship between the intestinal microbiota 
and urine levels of the ellagic acid-derived polyphenols, the urolithins, in a 
cohort of subjects following a three-week walnut dietary intervention. We 
longitudinally collected fecal and urine samples from 39 subjects before and 
after walnut consumption (2 oz per day for 21 days). 16S RNA gene sequencing was 
performed on fecal DNA to study the association between microbiota composition 
and the levels of nine urolithin metabolites, which were measured using 
UHPLC/Q-TOF-MS/MS. Fecal microbial composition was found to be significantly 
different between pre- and post-walnut intervention (beta diversity, 
FDR-p = 0.018; alpha diversity, p = 0.018). Roseburia, Rothia, Parasutterella, 
Lachnospiraceae UCG-004, Butyricicoccus, Bilophila, Eubacterium eligens, 
Lachnospiraceae UCG-001, Gordonibacter, Paraprevotella, Lachnospira, 
Ruminococcus torques, and Sutterella were identified as the 13 most 
significantly enriched genera after daily intake of walnuts. We observed 26 
genera that were significantly associated with 7 urolithin metabolites, with 22 
genera positively correlating after walnut supplementation (FDR-p ≤ 0.05). 
PICRUSt analysis showed that several inferred KEGG orthologs were associated 
with 4 urolithin metabolites after walnut intake. In this study, we found that 
walnut supplementation altered urolithin metabolites, which associates with 
specific changes in bacterial taxa and inferred functional contents.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03626-5
PMCID: PMC11566485
PMID: 39548408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to 
participate This study was approved by the University of Connecticut Health 
Institutional Review Board (IRB # 19-121JS-1) at the University of Connecticut 
Health. All participants provided written informed consent prior to enrollment 
in the study. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2024 Jan-Dec;53:19160216241293070. doi: 
10.1177/19160216241293070.

Alterations of Gut Microbiome Composition and Function Pre- and 
Post-Adenotonsillectomy in Children with Obstructive Sleep Apnea.

Chuang HH(1)(2)(3), Lee LA(2)(4)(5), Chuang LP(6), Li HY(4), Huang YS(7), Chou 
SH(8)(9), Lee GS(10)(11), Kuo TBJ(5)(12)(13), Yang CCH(5)(13), Huang CG(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Taipei Branch and Linkou Main Branch, Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, College of Life Science and Medicine, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Linkou Main Branch, 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Brain Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Linkou Main Branch, Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Child Psychiatry, Linkou Main Branch, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Graduate Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Science, Fu Jen Catholic 
University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(9)Biotools Co., Ltd., New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology, Ren-Ai Branch, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(11)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(12)Center for Mind and Brain Medicine, Tsaotun Psychiatric Center, Ministry of 
Health and Welfare, Nantou, Taiwan.
(13)Sleep Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(14)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Linkou Main Branch, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(15)Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, Department of Medical 
Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

IMPORTANCE: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in children is linked with alterations 
in the gut microbiome. The influence of adenotonsillectomy (AT), a primary 
intervention for OSA, on gut microbiota dynamics relative to disease severity 
remains to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the impact of OSA severity and AT on 
the gut microbiome in pediatric patients.
DESIGN: A prospective observational study.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PARTICIPANTS: A cohort of 55 pediatric patients treated with AT for OSA.
INTERVENTION: Total tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy procedures.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Comprehensive evaluations included in-laboratory 
polysomnography and 16S rRNA gut microbiome profiling at baseline, and again at 
3rd and 12thmonth following surgery.
RESULTS: Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities 
of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. 
Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae 
UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, 
Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were 
found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant 
post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. 
Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial 
α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa 
(Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius 
DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, 
UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and 
Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, 
transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative 
patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut 
microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and 
β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These 
changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and 
microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the 
specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as 
antibiotic use.

DOI: 10.1177/19160216241293070
PMCID: PMC11565609
PMID: 39544149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2024 Nov 7;191:275-286. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020.
Online  ahead of print.

Associations of the gut microbiome with outcomes in cervical and endometrial 
cancer patients treated with pembrolizumab: Insights from the phase II PRIMMO 
trial.

De Jaeghere EA(1), Hamerlinck H(2), Tuyaerts S(3), Lippens L(4), Van Nuffel 
AMT(5), Baiden-Amissah R(6), Vuylsteke P(7), Henry S(8), Trinh XB(9), van Dam 
PA(10), Aspeslagh S(11), De Caluwé A(12), Naert E(13), Lambrechts D(14), Hendrix 
A(15), De Wever O(16), Van de Vijver KK(17), Amant F(18), Vandecasteele K(19), 
Verhasselt B(20), Denys HG(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: emiel.dejaeghere@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: hannelore.hamerlinck@uzgent.be.
(3)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Medical Oncology, 
University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; Laboratory for Medical and 
Molecular Oncology (LMMO), VUB, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
sandra.tuyaerts@uzbrussel.be.
(4)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: lien.lippens@ugent.be.
(5)Anticancer Fund (ACF), Strombeek-Bever, Belgium.
(6)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
reginaesimensimah.baidenamissah@kuleuven.be.
(7)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: peter.vuylsteke@uclouvain.be.
(8)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: stephanie.henry@uclouvain.be.
(9)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), University 
Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research (CORE), 
Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, Belgium. 
Electronic address: xuanbich.trinh@uza.be.
(10)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital 
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), 
University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research 
(CORE), Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, 
Belgium. Electronic address: peter.vandam@uza.be.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, 
Belgium. Electronic address: sandrine.aspeslagh@uzbrussel.be.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium; 
Department of Radiation Oncology, General Hospital Sint-Maarten, Mechelen, 
Belgium. Electronic address: alex.decaluwe@bordet.be.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
eline.naert@ugent.be.
(14)VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, Belgium. Electronic address: 
diether.lambrechts@kuleuven.be.
(15)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: an.hendrix@ugent.be.
(16)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: olivier.dewever@ugent.be.
(17)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; Center for Gynecologic 
Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer Institute and Amsterdam Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
koen.vandevijver@uzgent.be.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Center for Gynecologic Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer 
Institute and Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: f.amant@nki.nl.
(19)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: katrien.vandecasteele@uzgent.be.
(20)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
Electronic address: bruno.verhasselt@uzgent.be.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
hannelore.denys@ugent.be.

BACKGROUND: The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen 
in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) 
carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory 
studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented.
METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained 
from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta 
diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear 
discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, 
disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were 
performed.
RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with 
the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall 
or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM 
taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between 
patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those 
with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its 
higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its 
Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct 
bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than 
four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence 
interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but 
non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data.
CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the 
intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and 
EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT 
Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020
PMID: 39515198

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest EAD: travel 
and accommodation expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, GSK, 
and Pfizer. AMTV: became an employee for GSK during the publication development. 
PV: consulting or advisory role (personal) from Eli Lily and Company, MSD, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche; research funding from Tesaro. SH: 
consulting or advisory role (personal) from AstraZeneca, BMSi, Gilead Sciences, 
Merck, MSD Oncology, Novartis, and Sanofi. SA: consulting or advisory role 
(institutional, not personal) for MSD, Sanofi, Roche, BMS, and Pfizer; research 
funding (institutional, not personal) from Sanofi. AD: research funding 
(institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca. EN: travel and accommodation 
expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pfizer, 
PharmaMar, Roche, and Teva. FA: consulting or advisory role (institutional, not 
personal) for MiMark. KV: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, not 
personal) from PharmaMar. HGD: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, 
not personal) from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lily and Company, GSK, MSD, Novartis, 
Pfizer, PharmaMar, Roche, Tesaro, and Teva; research funding (institutional, not 
personal) from Roche. HH, ST, LL, RB, XBT, PAV, AH, OD, KKV, and BV: declare no 
competing interests.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Nov 7;12(1):229. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01948-0.

Multimodal analysis identifies microbiome changes linked to stem cell 
transplantation-associated diseases.

Artacho A(#)(1), González-Torres C(#)(1), Gómez-Cebrián N(2), Moles-Poveda P(3), 
Pons J(1), Jiménez N(1), Casanova MJ(3), Montoro J(3), Balaguer A(3), Villalba 
M(3), Chorão P(3), Puchades-Carrasco L(2), Sanz J(4)(5)(6), Ubeda C(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Fundación Para El Fomento de La Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de La 
Comunitat Valenciana-FISABIO, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Drug Discovery Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain.
(3)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari I Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain.
(4)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari I Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain. jaime.sanz@uv.es.
(5)Departament de Medicina, Universitat de Valencia, Valencia, Spain. 
jaime.sanz@uv.es.
(6)CIBERONC, Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. jaime.sanz@uv.es.
(7)Fundación Para El Fomento de La Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de La 
Comunitat Valenciana-FISABIO, Valencia, Spain. carles.ubeda@fisabio.es.
(8)Centers of Biomedical Research Network (CIBER) in Epidemiology and Public 
Health, Madrid, Spain. carles.ubeda@fisabio.es.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) is 
one of the most efficient therapeutic options available to cure many 
hematological malignancies. However, severe complications derived from this 
procedure, including graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and infections, can limit 
its success and negatively impact survival. Previous studies have shown that 
alterations in the microbiome are associated with the development of 
allo-HSCT-derived complications. However, most studies relied on single 
techniques that can only analyze a unique aspect of the microbiome, which 
hinders our ability to understand how microbiome alterations drive 
allo-HSCT-associated diseases.
RESULTS: Here, we have applied multiple "omic" techniques (16S rRNA and shotgun 
sequencing, targeted and un-targeted metabolomics) in combination with machine 
learning approaches to define the most significant microbiome changes following 
allo-HSCT at multiple modalities (bacterial taxa, encoded functions, and derived 
metabolites). In addition, multivariate approaches were applied to study 
interactions among the various microbiome modalities (the interactome). Our 
results show that the microbiome of transplanted patients exhibits substantial 
changes in all studied modalities. These include depletion of beneficial 
microbes, mainly from the Clostridiales order, loss of their bacterial encoded 
functions required for the synthesis of key metabolites, and a reduction in 
metabolic end products such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These changes 
were followed by an expansion of bacteria that frequently cause infections after 
allo-HSCT, including several Staphylococcus species, which benefit from the 
reduction of bacteriostatic SCFAs. Additionally, we found specific alterations 
in all microbiome modalities that distinguished those patients who subsequently 
developed GVHD, including depletion of anti-inflammatory commensals, protective 
reactive oxygen detoxifying enzymes, and immunoregulatory metabolites such as 
acetate or malonate. Moreover, extensive shifts in the homeostatic relationship 
between bacteria and their metabolic products (e.g., Faecalibacterium and 
butyrate) were detected mainly in patients who later developed GVHD.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified specific microbiome changes at different 
modalities (microbial taxa, their encoded genes, and synthetized metabolites) 
and at the interface between them (the interactome) that precede the development 
of complications associated with allo-HSCT. These identified microbial features 
provide novel targets for the design of microbiome-based strategies to prevent 
diseases associated with stem cell transplantation. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01948-0
PMCID: PMC11542268
PMID: 39511587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microb Pathog. 2024 Dec;197:107106. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.107106. Epub 
2024 Nov 6.

Analyses of the gut microbial composition of domestic pig louse Haematopinus 
suis.

Deng YP(1), Yao C(2), Fu YT(3), Zhuo Y(1), Zou JL(1), Pan HY(1), Peng YY(1), Liu 
GH(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.
(2)Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine and One Health Center for 
Zoonoses and Tropical Infectious Diseases, Ross University School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Basseterre, Saint Kitts and Nevis.
(3)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China; Department of 
Parasitology, Xiangya School of Basic Medicine, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan Province, China.
(4)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China. Electronic 
address: liuguohua5202008@163.com.

Haematopinus suis is an obligatory ectoparasite of the domestic pig, serving as 
a vector of several swine pathogens and posing great threats to the pig 
industry. The gut microbiome of lice is thought of an important mediator of 
their healthy physiology. However, there is a great paucity of lice-associated 
microbial communities' structure and function. The current study aimed to 
profile the gut microbiome and to understand the microbial functions of swine 
lice by metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatics analyses. In total, 102,358 
(77.2 %) nonredundant genes were cataloged, by contrast, only a small proportion 
of genes were assigned to microbial taxa and functional assemblages. Bacteria of 
known or potential public health significance such as Anaplasma phagocytophilum, 
Chlamydia trachomatis, Waddlia chondrophila, Bacillus cereus, and Leptotrichia 
goodfellowii were observed in all samples. The integrated microbial profile 
further illustrated the evolutionary relevance of endosymbionts and detailed the 
functional composition, and findings suggested H. suis may acquire 
adenosylcobalamin by feeding due to an adenosylcobalamin synthesis defect and a 
lack of complete synthases of endosymbionts. Sucking lice contained fewer 
functional genes compared with ticks and fleas probably because of the obligate 
host specificity of parasitic lice. In addition, the genes from the intestines 
contained encompassed most of the microbial functional genes in sucking lice. A 
wide range of unknown taxonomic and functional assemblages were discovered, 
which improves our understanding related to microbial features and physiological 
activities of sucking lice. In general, this study increases the 
characterization of the microbiota of lice and offers clues for preventing and 
controlling lice infestation in swine production in the future.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.107106
PMID: 39510362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that all authors have read this original article and had no conflict of 
interest.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Nov 4;12(1):228. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01941-7.

Nepali oral microbiomes reflect a gradient of lifestyles from traditional to 
industrialized.

Ryu EP(1), Gautam Y(2), Proctor DM(3), Bhandari D(4)(5), Tandukar S(4)(6), Gupta 
M(1)(7), Gautam GP(8), Relman DA(9)(10)(11), Shibl AA(2)(12), Sherchand JB(4), 
Jha AR(13)(14), Davenport ER(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA.
(2)Genetic Heritage Group, Program in Biology, New York University Abu Dhabi, 
Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Public Health Research Laboratory, Institute of Medicine, Maharajgunj, 
Kathmandu, Nepal.
(5)School of Public Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)Organization for Public Health and Environment Management, Lalitpur, Bagmati, 
Nepal.
(7)Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, UAE.
(8)Department of Geography, Tribhuvan University, Nepalgunj, Nepal.
(9)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(11)Section of Infectious Diseases, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care 
System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(12)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, and Public Health Research Center, 
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(13)Genetic Heritage Group, Program in Biology, New York University Abu Dhabi, 
Abu Dhabi, UAE. jhaar@nyu.edu.
(14)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, and Public Health Research Center, 
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE. jhaar@nyu.edu.
(15)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA. emily.davenport@psu.edu.
(16)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA, USA. emily.davenport@psu.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jul 03:2024.07.01.601557. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.01.601557.

BACKGROUND: Lifestyle plays an important role in shaping the gut microbiome. 
However, its contributions to the oral microbiome remain less clear, due to the 
confounding effects of geography and methodology in investigations of 
populations studied to date. Furthermore, while the oral microbiome seems to 
differ between foraging and industrialized populations, we lack insight into 
whether transitions to and away from agrarian lifestyles shape the oral 
microbiota. Given the growing interest in so-called "vanishing microbiomes" 
potentially being a risk factor for increased disease prevalence in 
industrialized populations, it is important that we distinguish lifestyle from 
geography in the study of microbiomes across populations.
RESULTS: Here, we investigate salivary microbiomes of 63 Nepali individuals 
representing a spectrum of lifestyles: foraging, subsistence farming 
(individuals that transitioned from foraging to farming within the last 
50 years), agriculturalists (individuals that have transitioned to farming for 
at least 300 years), and industrialists (expatriates that immigrated to the USA 
within the last 20 years). We characterize the role of lifestyle in microbial 
diversity, identify microbes that differ between lifestyles, and pinpoint 
specific lifestyle factors that may be contributing to differences in the 
microbiomes across populations. Contrary to prevailing views, when geography is 
controlled for, oral microbiome alpha diversity does not differ significantly 
across lifestyles. Microbiome composition, however, follows the gradient of 
lifestyles from foraging through agrarianism to industrialism, supporting the 
notion that lifestyle indeed plays a role in the oral microbiome. Relative 
abundances of several individual taxa, including Streptobacillus and an 
unclassified Porphyromonadaceae genus, also mirror lifestyle. Finally, we 
identify specific lifestyle factors associated with microbiome composition 
across the gradient of lifestyles, including smoking and grain sources.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that by studying populations within Nepal, 
we can isolate an important role of lifestyle in determining oral microbiome 
composition. In doing so, we highlight the potential contributions of several 
lifestyle factors, underlining the importance of carefully examining the oral 
microbiome across lifestyles to improve our understanding of global microbiomes. 
Video Abstract.

Publisher: सारांश पृष्ठभूमि: मानवको आन्द्रामा ब्याक्टेरिया, भाइरस, फंगस (ढुसी), 
लगायत अरू विभिन्न प्रकारका सूक्ष्मजीवहरूका समुदाय पाईन्छन्, जसलाई माइक्रोबायोम 
भनिन्छ। आन्द्रामा हुने माइक्रोबायोमले मानवको पाचन, प्रतिरक्षा प्रणाली, र अन्य 
शारीरिक प्रक्रियाहरूमा योगदान पुर्याउने हुनाले यिनले मानव स्वास्थ्य र रोगको 
निर्धारण गर्नमा महत्त्वपूर्ण भूमिका खेल्छन्। त्यसैगरी मानव मुखमा पनि 
सूक्ष्मजीवहरूका समुदायहरू हुन्छन् जसले दाँत र गिजालाई स्वस्थ राख्नमा योगदान 
पुर्‍याउँछन्। जीवनशैलीले आन्द्राको माइक्रोबायोमलाई आकार दिन महत्त्वपूर्ण भूमिका 
खेल्छ। साथै, जङलमा निर्भर भएर प्रकृतिक जीवनशैली जिउने र औध्योगिक्रित भएका मानव 
समुदायहरुको बीच मुखको माइक्रोबायोममा धेरै भिन्नता देखिन्छ। जङलमा निर्भर भएर 
प्रकृतिक जीवनशैली जिउने मानव समुदायहरुमा पाईने धेरै सूक्ष्मजीवहरू औद्योगिक 
जनसमुदायहरुमा मा पाईन छाडिसकेका छन् र यस्ता ‘विलुप्त माइक्रोबायोम’ बिभिन्न 
रोगहरुका जोखिमका कारक हुन सक्ने हुँदा चासोका बिषय बन्न पुगेका छन्। तथापि, 
अहिलेसम्मका अनुसन्धानमा जीवनशैलिको परिवर्तन सँगै मुखको माइक्रोबायोममा के कस्ता 
परिवर्तनहरु आउँछन् भन्ने कुरा स्पष्ट हुन सकेको छैन। विभिन्न जीवनशैली ब्यथीत 
गर्ने मानिसहरु बीच जीवनशैलीको साथसाथै भौगोलिक भिन्नता पनि हुने गर्दछ। तसर्थ, 
मनिसहरुका मुखका माईक्रोबायोममा जीवनशैली र भूगोलको असरलाई छुट्याउनु महत्त्वपूर्ण 
देखिएको छ। परिणामहरू: यहाँ, हामीले ६३ जना नेपाली व्यक्तिको थुक संकलन गरेर मुखका 
माइक्रोबायोमको अनुसन्धान गर्यौं। हाम्रो अध्ययनमा संलग्न भएका ब्यक्तिहरुले 
विभिन्न जीवनशैलीको प्रतिनिधित्व गर्छन्: जङलमा निर्भर भएर प्रकृतिक जीवनशैली 
जिउने, जङलबाट कृषितर्फ हालसालै परिवर्तन भएका (अन्तिम ५० वर्ष भित्र), कृषक 
(बिगतका ३०० वर्ष भन्दा बढी समयदेखि कृषिमा संलग्न भएका), र औद्योगिक (अन्तिम २० 
वर्ष भित्र संयुक्त राज्य अमेरिका मा आप्रवासन गरेका नेपालीहरु)। हामीले यस् 
अध्ययनमा जीवनशैलीले मुखका माईक्रोबायोमको विविधतामा कसरी योगदान पुर्याउँछन् भन्ने 
कुरको विश्लेषण गरेका छौं, जीवनशैलीहरू बीच फरक पर्ने सूक्ष्मजीवहरूको पहिचान गरेका 
छौं, र माइक्रोबायोममा फरक पार्ने कारकहरूको पहिचान गरेका छौं। प्रचलित 
दृष्टिकोणहरू विपरीत, भूगोललाई नियन्त्रण गर्दा, बिभिन्न जीवनशैलीहरू बीच मुखको 
माइक्रोबायोममा हुने सूक्ष्मजीवहरूको सन्ख्या (अल्फा विविधता) मा धेरै फरक देखिएन, 
तर मुखको माइक्रोबायोमको संरचना भने जीवनशैलीको क्रमिक चरणसँग मिल्दोजुल्दो देखियो, 
जसले देखाउँछ कि जीवनशैलीले मुखको माइक्रोबायोममा को संरचना निर्धारण गर्न एउटा 
प्रमुख भूमिका खेल्दछ। स्ट्रेप्टोबासिलस र असम्प्रेषित पोरफिरोमोनाडासिए जीनस 
सहितका केही सूक्ष्मजीवहरूको सापेक्ष सापेक्षिक प्रचुरता पनि जीवनशैलीसँग मेल खाने 
हामीले यस् अध्ययनबाट थाहा पाएका छौं। अन्ततः, हामीले जीवनशैलीको क्रमिक चरणमा 
माइक्रोबायोम संरचनासँग सम्बन्धित विशिष्ट जीवनशैलीसँग आबद्ध हुने धूम्रपान र अनाज 
जस्ता कारकहरूको पहिचान गरेका छौं। निष्कर्ष: हाम्रा निष्कर्षहरूले प्रष्ट परेका छन 
कि भूगोललाई नियन्त्रण गर्दा, हाम्रो जीवनशैलीले हाम्रा मुखको माइक्रोबायोमको 
संरचना निर्धारण गर्ने महत्त्वपूर्ण भूमिका खेल्दो रहेछ। यस् अध्ययनले मानव 
समुदायहरुमा मुखको माइक्रोबायोमको अध्ययन गरेमा माइक्रोबायोमबारेको हाम्रो बुझाइमा 
सुधार ल्याउन सकिने पनि देखाउँछ। बढ्दो शहरीकरण सँगसँगै नेपालीहरुको माइक्रोबायोममा 
परिवर्तन हुँदै गरेको र यस्ता परिवर्तनहरुले नेपालीहरुमा बिभिन्न दीर्घकालीन 
रोगहरुको व्यापकता बढाउन सक्ने हुनाले यस् सम्बन्धमा उपर्योक्त निकायहरुको 
ध्यानाकर्षण हुनुपर्ने आवश्यकता पनि यस् अध्ययनले प्रष्ट पारेको छ।.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01941-7
PMCID: PMC11533410
PMID: 39497165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Parasit Vectors. 2024 Nov 4;17(1):448. doi: 10.1186/s13071-024-06512-1.

Deciphering the microbial communities in ticks of Inner Mongolia: ecological 
determinants and pathogen profiles.

Li C(1), Ma R(1), Gao A(1), Jiang N(1), Sang C(1), Zhang Y(1), Tian H(1), Li 
J(2)(3), Hu W(4)(5), Feng X(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, China. 
leejianshin@163.com.
(3)Basic Medical College, Guangxi Traditional Chinese Medical University, 
Nanning, 530005, Guangxi, China. leejianshin@163.com.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, China. 
huw@imu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, State Key Laboratory of 
Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity 
Science and Ecological Engineering, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of 
Contemporary Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
200438, China. huw@imu.edu.cn.
(6)School of Global Health, Chinese Center for Tropical Diseases Research, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 20025, China. 
fengxinyu2013@163.com.
(7)One Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University-The University of Edinburgh, 
Shanghai, 20025, China. fengxinyu2013@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Ticks are vectors of numerous pathogens, with their bacterial 
composition, abundance, diversity, and interaction influencing both their growth 
and disease transmission efficiency. Despite the abundance of ticks in Inner 
Mongolia, China, comprehensive data on their microbial communities are lacking. 
This study aims to analyze the microbial communities within ticks from Inner 
Mongolia to inform innovative control strategies for interrupting pathogen 
transmission.
METHODS: Tick samples were collected from animals and vegetation in multiple 
locations across Inner Mongolia and stored at - 80 °C. Ticks were identified 
using morphological keys and molecular biology methods. Full-length 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing was performed on collected samples. Bacterial community 
composition and diversity were mainly analyzed using bioinformatic tools such as 
QIIME, phyloseq, and DESeq2. Alpha diversity was assessed using Chao1, ACE, and 
Shannon indices, while beta diversity was evaluated using Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarity matrices. LEfSe analysis was applied to identify taxa associated 
with ecological and biological variables.
RESULTS: A total of 5,048,137 high-quality read counts were obtained, forming an 
average of 789.3 OTUs per sample. Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes 
were the most dominant phyla. Bacterial community composition varied 
significantly with geography, with Dermacentor nuttalli showing a higher 
abundance of Rickettsia in Xilingol League, while other regions had different 
dominant genera. The microbial community also differed based on the feeding 
status of ticks. Additionally, the microbiota of engorged ticks showed organ 
specificity. Pathogen detection efforts revealed the presence of nine pathogens 
across all three tick species. D. nuttalli was found to carry a significantly 
higher burden of pathogenic bacteria, making it the most potentially threatening 
tick species in Inner Mongolia.
CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights significant variations in tick microbiomes 
influenced by geographic location, feeding status, and tick species. It 
underscores the importance of enhancing tick and tick-borne disease surveillance 
in Inner Mongolia for early detection and control of emerging pathogens.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-024-06512-1
PMCID: PMC11533347
PMID: 39497080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Curr Microbiol. 2024 Nov 3;81(12):439. doi: 10.1007/s00284-024-03969-2.

Deciphering Phyllomicrobiome of Cauliflower Leaf: Revelation by Metagenomic and 
Microbiological Analysis of Tolerant and Susceptible Genotypes Against Black Rot 
Disease.

Geat N(1)(2), Singh D(3)(4), Saha P(5), Jatoth R(6), Babu PL(1), Devi GSR(7), 
Lakhran L(2), Singh D(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New 
Delhi, 110012, India.
(2)Agricultural Research Station, Mandor, Agriculture University, Jodhpur, 
342304, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New 
Delhi, 110012, India. dinesh_iari@rediffmail.com.
(4)Division of Crop Protection, ICAR- Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, 
Lucknow, 226002, India. dinesh_iari@rediffmail.com.
(5)Division of Vegetable Science, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, 
New Delhi, 110012, India.
(6)Agriculture College, Sircilla, Professor Jayashanker Telangana State 
Agricultural University Hyderabad, Telangana, 500030, India.
(7)Indian Grassland Forage Research Institute, Regional Station, Dharwad, 
580005, Karnataka, India.
(8)Division of Plant Improvement and Pest Management, ICAR-Central Arid Zone 
Research Institute, Jodhpur, 342003, India. devendraiari@gmail.com.

Understanding the phyllomicrobiome dynamics in cauliflower plants holds 
significant promise for enhancing crop resilience against black rot disease, 
caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. In this study, the culturable 
microbiome and metagenomic profile of tolerant (BR-161) and susceptible (Pusa 
Sharad) cauliflower genotypes were investigated to elucidate microbial 
interactions associated with disease tolerance. Isolation of phyllospheric 
bacteria from asymptomatic and black rot disease symptomatic leaves of tolerant 
and susceptible cultivars yielded 46 diverse bacterial isolates. Molecular 
identification via 16S rRNA sequencing revealed differences in the diversity of 
microbial taxa between genotypes and health conditions. Metagenomic profiling 
using next-generation sequencing elucidated distinct microbial communities, with 
higher diversity observed in black rot disease symptomatic leaf of BR-161. Alpha 
and beta diversity indices highlighted differences in microbial community 
structure and composition between genotypes and health conditions. Taxonomic 
analysis revealed a core microbiome consisting of genera such as Xanthomonas, 
Psychrobacillus, Lactobacillus, and Pseudomonas across all the samples. 
Validation through microbiological methods confirmed the presence of these key 
genera. The findings provide novel insights into the phyllomicrobiome of black 
rot-tolerant and susceptible genotypes of cauliflower. Harnessing beneficial 
microbial communities identified in this study offers promising avenues for 
developing sustainable strategies to manage black rot disease and enhance 
cauliflower crop health and productivity.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-024-03969-2
PMID: 39488668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Nov 1;24(1):444. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03612-x.

Vaginal microbiota in term pregnant women with differences in cervical ripeness 
revealed by 2bRAD-M.

Lu S(1)(2), Wu Q(1)(3), He W(1), Du X(1), Cui Q(1), Yang Y(4)(5)(6)(7), Yin 
Z(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of the Study of Abnormal Gametes and the Reproductive 
Tract, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China.
(3)Jin'an Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Lu An, 237006, Anhui 
Province, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China. 
wlj69513@sina.com.
(5)Engineering Research Center of Biopreservation and Artificial Organs, 
Ministry of Education, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. 
wlj69513@sina.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, No 81 
Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. wlj69513@sina.com.
(7)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Disorders and Obstetrics and 
Gynecology Diseases, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. 
wlj69513@sina.com.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China. 
dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.
(9)NHC Key Laboratory of the Study of Abnormal Gametes and the Reproductive 
Tract, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China. 
dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.
(10)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, No 81 
Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.
(11)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Disorders and Obstetrics and 
Gynecology Diseases, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. 
dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Cervical ripening is a multifactorial outcome, and the association 
between cervical ripening and vaginal microbiota remains unexplored in term 
primiparous women. A new sequencing technology, microbiome 2bRAD sequencing 
(2bRAD-M) that provides a higher level of species discrimination compared to 
amplicon sequencing. We applied 2bRAD-M to analyze the vaginal microbiota in a 
population with variations in cervical ripeness and to explore potential 
microbiota factors influencing cervical ripening.
METHODS: A total of 30 full-term primigravid women participated in this study, 
with 15 belonging to the low scoring group of cervical ripeness and 15 to the 
high scoring group. Clinical information was collected from the participants, 
and the vaginal microbiota and community structure of both groups were analyzed 
using 2bRAD-M sequencing. Microbiota diversity and differential analyses were 
conducted to explore potential factors influencing cervical ripening.
RESULTS: A total of 605 species were detected. There was no difference in 
vaginal microbiota diversity between the two groups, and the vaginal microbial 
composition was structurally similar. In the two groups, Lactobacillus crispatus 
and Lactobacillus iners were identified as the two pivotal species through 
random forest analysis. Concurrent, extensive and close connections between 
species within the two groups were observed in the correlation analysis, 
influencing the aforementioned two species. Pairwise comparisons showed that 
Sphingomonas (P = 0.0017) and three others were abundant in high scoring group, 
while Alloprevotella (P = 0.0014), Tannerella (P = 0.0033), Bacteroides 
(P = 0.0132), Malassezia (P = 0.0296), Catonella (P = 0.0353) and Pseudomonas 
(P = 0.0353) and so on showed higher abundance in low scoring group. Linear 
discriminant analysis effect size identified 29 discriminative feature taxa.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, vaginal microbiota was sequenced using 2bRAD-M. 
With a relatively simple structure, a more stable vaginal microbiota is 
associated with higher cervical ripeness, and certain microorganisms, such as 
Sphingomonas, may play a beneficial role in cervical ripening.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03612-x
PMCID: PMC11529209
PMID: 39487440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Affect Disord. 2024 Oct 30;371:22-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.10.086. Online
 ahead of print.

Edinburgh postpartum depression scores are associated with vaginal and gut 
microbiota in pregnancy.

Nel NH(1), Marafie A(2), Bassis CM(3), Sugino KY(4), Nzerem A(1), Knickmeyer 
RR(2), McKee KS(5), Comstock SS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University, 
204 Trout, 469 Wilson Rd, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States of America.
(2)College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University 
of Michigan, United States of America.
(4)Harold Hamm Diabetes Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, United States of America.
(5)Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, United 
States of America.
(6)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University, 
204 Trout, 469 Wilson Rd, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States of America. 
Electronic address: comsto37@msu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal and postpartum depression may be influenced by the 
composition of host associated microbiomes. As such, the objective of this study 
was to elucidate the relationship between the human gut or vaginal microbiomes 
in pregnancy with prenatal or postpartum depression.
METHODS: 140 female participants were recruited at their first prenatal visit 
and completed the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) to screen for 
depression and anxiety, in addition the EPDS was completed one month postpartum. 
Vaginal and stool biospecimens were collected in the third trimester, analyzed 
using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and assessed for alpha and beta diversity. 
Individual taxa differences and clustering using the k-medoids algorithm enabled 
community state type classification.
RESULTS: Participants with higher postpartum EPDS scores had higher species 
richness and lower abundance of L. crispatus in the vaginal microbiota compared 
to those with lower EPDS scores. Participants with a higher prenatal EPDS score 
had lower species richness of the gut microbiome. Participants with a vaginal 
community state type dominated by L. iners had the highest mean prenatal EPDS 
scores, whereas postpartum EPDS scores were similar regardless of prenatal 
vaginal state type.
LIMITATIONS: Our small sample size and participant's self-report bias limits 
generalizability of results.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression in the prenatal and postpartum period is associated with 
the composition and diversity of the gut and vaginal microbiomes in the third 
trimester of pregnancy. These results provide a foundational understanding of 
the microbial relationships between maternal health and depression for 
identifying potential therapeutic treatments.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.10.086
PMID: 39481687

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2024 Oct 29;230(Pt 2):116596. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2024.116596.  Online ahead of print.

Insights into the modulatory effects of host-gut microbial xanthine 
co-metabolism on high-fat diet-fed mice.

Chen WB(1), Hu GA(1), Dong BC(1), Sun HY(1), Lu DZ(1), Ru MY(1), Yu YL(1), Wang 
H(2), Wei B(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Science & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, Key Laboratory of Marine 
Fishery Resources Exploitment & Utilization of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China.
(2)College of Pharmaceutical Science & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, Key Laboratory of Marine 
Fishery Resources Exploitment & Utilization of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China; Binjiang Institute of 
Artificial Intelligence, ZJUT, Hangzhou 310056, China. Electronic address: 
hongw@zjut.edu.cn.
(3)College of Pharmaceutical Science & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, Key Laboratory of Marine 
Fishery Resources Exploitment & Utilization of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China; Binjiang Institute of 
Artificial Intelligence, ZJUT, Hangzhou 310056, China. Electronic address: 
binwei@zjut.edu.cn.

Gut microbiota-mediated endobiotic and xenobiotic metabolism play crucial roles 
in disease progression, and drug therapy/toxicity. Our recent study suggested 
that gut microbiota-mediated xanthine metabolism is correlated with resistance 
to high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity. Here, we explored the role of host-gut 
microbial xanthine co-metabolism in the prevention and treatment of HFD-induced 
obesity by orally administration of Bifidobacterium longum, xanthine, and a 
xanthine oxidase inhibitor (topiroxostat). The findings indicate that xanthine 
exhibits a significantly protective effect against HFD-induced obesity. While B. 
longum, xanthine, and topiroxostat did not alleviate the dysbiosis of the weight 
and glucose metabolism of HFD-induced obesity (DIO) and obesity resistance (DIR) 
mice. 16S rRNA sequencing analyses revealed that treatments with B. longum 
significantly altered gut microbiota composition in HFD-fed and DIO mice. 
Microbial interaction network analysis revealed several Bacteroidetes species, 
such as Amulumruptor caecigallinarius and Muribaculum intestinale, as keystone 
taxa that were notably enriched by B. longum. Untargeted metabolomics analysis 
implied that xanthine might serve as a crucial molecule in regulating body 
weight, exerting a preventive effect on HFD-induced obesity. This study offers 
new perspectives on the influence of host-gut microbial xanthine co-metabolism 
on HFD-fed mice and emphasizes the promising role of xanthine in promoting 
weight loss.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2024.116596
PMID: 39481656

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Oct 15;15:1456087. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1456087. 
eCollection 2024.

Associations between maternal microbiome, metabolome and incidence of low-birth 
weight in Guatemalan participants from the Women First Trial.

Ruebel ML(1)(2), Gilley SP(3), Yeruva L(1)(2), Tang M(3), Frank DN(4), Garcés 
A(5), Figueroa L(5), Lan RS(2)(6), Assress HA(2)(6), Kemp JF(3), Westcott 
JLE(3), Hambidge KM(3), Shankar K(3), Krebs NF(3).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome and Metabolism Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Southeast Area USDA-ARS, 
Little Rock, AR, United States.
(2)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Nutrition, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(5)Maternal Infant Health Center, Instituto de Nutrición de Centro América y 
Panamá (INCAP), Guatemala City, Guatemala.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Developmental Nutrition, University of 
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.

BACKGROUND: Low birth weight (LBW; <2,500 g) affects approximately 15 to 20 
percent of global births annually and is associated with suboptimal child 
development. Recent studies suggest a link between the maternal gut microbiome 
and poor obstetric and perinatal outcomes. The goal of this study was to examine 
relationships between maternal microbial taxa, fecal metabolites, and maternal 
anthropometry on incidence of LBW in resource-limited settings.
METHODS: This was a secondary analysis of the Women First trial conducted in a 
semi-rural region of Guatemala. Maternal weight was measured at 12 and 34 weeks 
(wk) of gestation. Infant anthropometry measures were collected within 48 h of 
delivery. Maternal fecal samples at 12 and 34 weeks were used for microbiome 
(16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing) and metabolomics analysis (34 wk). Linear 
mixed models using the MaAslin2 package were utilized to assess changes in 
microbiome associated with LBW. Predictive models using gradient boosted 
machines (XGBoost) were developed using the H2o.ai engine.
RESULTS: No differences in β-diversity were observed at either time point 
between mothers with LBW infants relative to normal weight (NW) infants. Simpson 
diversity at 12 and 34 weeks was lower in mothers with LBW infants. Notable 
differences in genus-level abundance between LBW and NW mothers (p < 0.05) were 
observed at 12 weeks with increasing abundances of Barnesiella, 
Faecalibacterium, Sutterella, and Bacterioides. At 34 weeks, there were lower 
abundances of Magasphaera, Phascolarctobacterium, and Turicibacter and higher 
abundances of Bacteriodes, and Fusobacterium in mothers with LBW infants. Fecal 
metabolites related to bile acids, tryptophan metabolism and fatty acid related 
metabolites changed in mothers with LBW infants. Classification models to 
predict LBW based on maternal anthropometry and predicted microbial functions 
showed moderate performance.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, the findings indicate that alterations in the maternal 
microbiome and metabolome were associated with LBW. Future research should 
target functional and predictive roles of the maternal gut microbiome in infant 
birth outcomes including birthweight.

Copyright © 2024 Ruebel, Gilley, Yeruva, Tang, Frank, Garcés, Figueroa, Lan, 
Assress, Kemp, Westcott, Hambidge, Shankar and Krebs.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1456087
PMCID: PMC11518777
PMID: 39473842

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 Oct 14;14:1443654. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2024.1443654. eCollection 2024.

The influence of perilipin 5 deficiency on gut microbiome profiles in murine 
metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) and 
MAFLD-hepatocellular carcinoma.

Krizanac M(#)(1), Štancl P(#)(2), Mass-Sanchez PB(1), Karlić R(2), Moeckel D(3), 
Lammers T(3), Asimakopoulos A(1), Weiskirchen R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and 
Clinical Chemistry (IFMPEGKC), RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics Group, Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, 
Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Institute for Experimental Molecular Imaging, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) has 
emerged as the leading cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide. Over 
the years, Perilipin 5 (PLIN5) has been recognized as a key regulator of both 
MAFLD and HCC development. In our previous studies we demonstrated that 
deficiency in Plin5 reduces the severity of MAFLD and HCC in mice. 
Interestingly, it has been established that patients with MAFLD and HCC exhibit 
various changes in their gut microbiome profiles. The gut microbiome itself has 
been shown to play a role in modulating carcinogenesis and the immune response 
against cancer.
METHODS: Therefore, we conducted a study to investigate the alterations in fecal 
microbiome composition in wild type (WT) and Plin5-deficient (Plin5 -/-) mice 
models of MAFLD and MAFLD-induced HCC (MAFLD-HCC). We utilized 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing analysis to profile the composition of gut bacteria in fecal samples.
RESULTS: Notably, we discovered that the absence of Plin5 alone is already 
associated with changes in gut microbiota composition. Moreover, feeding the 
mice a Western diet (WD) resulted in additional microbial alterations. 
Interestingly, Plin5 -/- animals exhibited an enrichment of the beneficial taxa 
Lactobacillus in both animal models.
DISCUSSION: Our findings identify Plin5 as a major regulator of gut microbiota 
during the development of MAFLD and MAFLD-HCC.

Copyright © 2024 Krizanac, Štancl, Mass-Sanchez, Karlić, Moeckel, Lammers, 
Asimakopoulos and Weiskirchen.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2024.1443654
PMCID: PMC11513398
PMID: 39469452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2024 Oct 26;10(1):203. doi: 10.1038/s41531-024-00802-2.

Microbial biomarker discovery in Parkinson's disease through a network-based 
approach.

Zhao Z(1)(2), Chen J(3), Zhao D(3), Chen B(3), Wang Q(3), Li Y(3), Chen J(3), 
Bai C(3), Guo X(3), Hu N(3)(4), Zhang B(3)(4), Zhao R(5)(6), Yuan J(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Peking University Third Hospital, 100191, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Institute for Drug Evaluation, Peking University Health Science Center, 
100191, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Peking University Sixth Hospital, Peking University 
Institute of Mental Health, NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health (Peking 
University), National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking 
University Sixth Hospital), Peking University, 100191, Beijing, China.
(4)First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, No. 222, Zhongshan 
Road, Dalian, 116011, Liaoning, China.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Peking University Third Hospital, 100191, Beijing, 
China. zhaorongsheng@bjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Institute for Drug Evaluation, Peking University Health Science Center, 
100191, Beijing, China. zhaorongsheng@bjmu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Neurology, Peking University Sixth Hospital, Peking University 
Institute of Mental Health, NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health (Peking 
University), National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking 
University Sixth Hospital), Peking University, 100191, Beijing, China. 
junliangyuan@bjmu.edu.cn.

Associations between the gut microbiota and Parkinson's disease (PD) have been 
widely investigated. However, the replicable biomarkers for PD diagnosis across 
multiple populations remain elusive. Herein, we performed a meta-analysis to 
investigate the pivotal role of the gut microbiome in PD and its potential 
diagnostic implications. Six 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequence datasets from five 
independent studies were integrated, encompassing 550 PD and 456 healthy control 
samples. The analysis revealed significant alterations in microbial composition 
and alpha and beta diversity, emphasizing altered gut microbiota in PD. Specific 
microbial taxa, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, and Coprococcus_2, known 
as butyrate producers, were notably diminished in PD, potentially contributing 
to intestinal inflammation. Conversely, genera such as Akkermansia and Bilophila 
exhibited increased relative abundances. A network-based algorithm called 
NetMoss was utilized to identify potential biomarkers of PD. Afterwards, a 
classification model incorporating 11 optimized genera demonstrated high 
performance. Further functional analyses indicated enrichment in pathways 
related to neurodegeneration and metabolic pathways. These findings illuminate 
the intricate relationship between the gut microbiota and PD, offering insights 
into potential therapeutic interventions and personalized diagnostic strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41531-024-00802-2
PMCID: PMC11513973
PMID: 39461950

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. BJOG. 2024 Oct 21. doi: 10.1111/1471-0528.17979. Online ahead of print.

Oral, Vaginal, and Stool Microbial Signatures in Patients With Endometriosis as 
Potential Diagnostic Non-Invasive Biomarkers: A Prospective Cohort Study.

Hicks C(1), Leonardi M(2), Chua XY(1), Mari-Breedt L(1), Espanda M(2), El-Omar 
EM(1), Condous G(2), El-Assaad F(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome Research Centre, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine & 
Health, St George & Sutherland Clinical Campuses, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(2)Endometriosis Ultrasound and Advanced Endosurgery Unit, Sydney Medical School 
Nepean, Nepean Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To identify a microbial signature for endometriosis for use as a 
diagnostic non-invasive biomarker.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort pilot study.
SETTING: Nepean Hospital and UNSW Microbiome Research Centre, Australia.
POPULATION: Sixty-four age- and sex-matched subjects (n = 19 healthy control 
(HC); n = 24 non-endometriosis (N-ENDO) and n = 21 confirmed endometriosis 
(ENDO)). All study participants, besides healthy controls, underwent 
laparoscopic surgical assessment for endometriosis, and histology was performed 
on excised lesions.
METHODS: Oral, stool and, vaginal samples were self-collected at a single time 
point for healthy controls, and preoperatively for patients undergoing 
laparoscopy. Samples underwent 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, followed by 
bioinformatics analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Compositional differences between cohorts as identified 
by diversity analyses, and differentially abundant microbial taxa, as identified 
by LEfSE analysis.
RESULTS: The composition of the oral (adjusted p = 0.003), and stool (adjusted 
p = 0.042) microbiota is different between the three cohorts. Differentially 
abundant taxa are present within each cohort as identified by LEfSE analysis. 
Particularly, Fusobacterium was enriched in the oral samples of patients with 
moderate/severe endometriosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taxonomic and compositional differences were found between the 
microbiota in the mouth, gut and, vagina of patients with and without 
endometriosis and healthy controls. Fusobacterium was enriched in patients with 
moderate/severe endometriosis. Fusobacterium is noted as a key pathogen in 
periodontal disease, a common comorbidity in endometriosis. These findings 
suggest a role for the oral, stool and, vaginal microbiome in endometriosis, and 
present potential for microbial-based treatments and the design of a diagnostic 
swab.

© 2024 The Author(s). BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17979
PMID: 39431364

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Oct 4;15:1423464. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1423464. eCollection 2024.

Calorie restriction during gestation impacts maternal and offspring fecal 
microbiome in mice.

Gilley SP(1), Ruebel ML(2)(3), Chintapalli SV(3)(4), Wright CJ(5), Rozance 
PJ(5), Shankar K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Nutrition, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Microbiome and Metabolism Research Unit (MMRU), United States Department of 
Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS), Southeast Area, Little 
Rock, AR, United States.
(3)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR, United States.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neonatology, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.

BACKGROUND: Maternal undernutrition is the most common cause of fetal growth 
restriction (FGR) worldwide. FGR increases morbidity and mortality during 
infancy, as well as contributes to adult-onset diseases including obesity and 
type 2 diabetes. The role of the maternal or offspring microbiome in growth 
outcomes following FGR is not well understood.
METHODS: FGR was induced by 30% maternal calorie restriction (CR) during the 
second half of gestation in C57BL/6 mice. Pup weights were obtained on day of 
life 0, 1, and 7 and ages 3, 4 and 16 weeks. Fecal pellets were collected from 
pregnant dams at gestational day 18.5 and from offspring at ages 3 and 4 weeks 
of age. Bacterial genomic DNA was used for amplification of the V4 variable 
region of the 16S rRNA gene. Multivariable associations between maternal CR and 
taxonomic abundance were assessed using the MaAsLin2 package. Associations 
between microbial taxa and offspring outcomes were performed using 
distance-based redundancy analysis and Pearson correlations.
RESULTS: FGR pups weighed about 20% less than controls. Beta but not alpha 
diversity differed between control and CR dam microbiomes. CR dams had lower 
relative abundance of Turicibacter, Flexispira, and Rikenella, and increased 
relative abundance of Parabacteroides and Prevotella. Control and FGR offspring 
microbiota differed by beta diversity at ages 3 and 4 weeks. At 3 weeks, FGR 
offspring had decreased relative abundance of Akkermansia and Sutterella and 
increased relative abundance of Anaerostipes and Paraprevotella. At 4 weeks, FGR 
animals had decreased relative abundance of Allobaculum, Sutterella, 
Bifidobacterium, and Lactobacillus, among others, and increased relative 
abundance of Turcibacter, Dorea, and Roseburia. Maternal Helicobacter abundance 
was positively associated with offspring weight. Akkermansia abundance at age 3 
and 4 weeks was negatively associated with adult weight.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate gut microbial dysbiosis in pregnant dams and 
offspring at two timepoints following maternal calorie restriction. Additional 
research is needed to test for functional roles of the microbiome in offspring 
growth outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Gilley, Ruebel, Chintapalli, Wright, Rozance and Shankar.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1423464
PMCID: PMC11487197
PMID: 39429739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Oct 17:izae199. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izae199. Online ahead
 of print.

Gut Microbial Signatures in Pediatric Crohn's Disease Vary According to Disease 
Activity Measures and Are Influenced by Proxies of Gastrointestinal Transit 
Time: An ImageKids Study.

Nichols B(1), Russell RK(2), Short B(1), Papadopoulou R(1), Focht G(3), Ijaz 
UZ(4), Walters TD(5), Sladek M(6), Hansen R(7), Mack DR(8)(9), Wine E(10), 
Griffiths AM(5), Turner D(3), Gerasimidis K(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, University of 
Glasgow, New Lister Building, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 2ER, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Royal Hospital for Children and 
Young People, 50 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
(3)Juliet Keidan Institute of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(4)James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Cracow, Poland.
(7)Division of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(8)CHEO Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centre, Division of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON K1H 
8L1, Canada.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated relationships between disease activity measures 
and the gut microbiome in children with Crohn's disease (CD) and how these were 
confounded by gastrointestinal transit time.
METHODS: Microbiome was profiled (16S rRNA sequencing) in feces from 196 
children with CD. Sixty participants also provided samples after 18 months. 
Mural inflammation (Pediatric Inflammatory Crohn's Magnetic Resonance 
Enterography Index, PICMI), the simple endoscopic score for CD, and the weighted 
pediatric Crohn's disease activity index (wPCDAI) were assessed. Fecal 
calprotectin, plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), and fecal water content (FWC), a 
proxy of gastrointestinal transit time, were measured too.
RESULTS: Microbiome α diversity, clustering, and differential taxa were related 
to disease status, but varied remarkably by disease activity measure used. The 
strongest relationships between microbiome and disease activity status were 
observed using wPCDAI; fewer or no relationships were seen using more objective 
measures like PICMI. Taxa predictive of disease activity status were dependent 
on the disease activity measure used with negligible overlap. Active disease was 
associated with more pathobionts (eg, Viellonella, Enterobacterales) and fewer 
fiber-fermenting organisms. The effect FWC had on microbiome superseded the 
effect of active disease for all disease activity measures, particularly with 
wPCDAI. Accounting for FWC, the differences in microbial signatures explained by 
disease activity status were attenuated or lost.
CONCLUSIONS: In CD, microbiome signatures fluctuate depending on the measure 
used to assess disease severity; several of these signals might be secondary 
disease effects linked with changes in gut motility in active disease. PICMI 
appears to be less influenced when studying relationships between microbiome and 
mural inflammation in CD.

Plain Language Summary: Microbiome signatures are related to Crohn’s disease 
status but vary remarkably by disease activity measure used. The effect gut 
transit time has on microbiome supersedes and confounds the effect of active 
disease, particularly with the use of less objective disease activity measures.

© 2024 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izae199
PMID: 39419819

1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2024 Oct 7;17:2231-2241. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S473237. eCollection 2024.

Oral Microbiota Variations in Psoriasis Patients Without Comorbidity.

Zhao K(#)(1), Zhao Y(#)(2), Guo A(1), Xiao S(1), Tu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, 710004, People's Republic of China.
(2)National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Biodiagnosis and 
Biotherapy, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
710004, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease, and its etiology 
is still unclear. There is increasing evidence suggesting that microorganisms 
may trigger psoriasis. However, the relationship between psoriasis and oral 
microbiota remains poorly understood. Our aim is to identify differences in the 
composition and diversity of the oral microbiota between patients with psoriasis 
and healthy controls, and to discover oral microbial markers for assessing the 
severity of psoriasis.
METHODS: This study recruited 20 psoriasis patients and 20 healthy individuals, 
collecting their saliva to analyze the composition of the oral microbiota in 
psoriasis patients. We employed 16S rRNA sequencing technology and utilized 
various methods for oral microbiome analysis, including the Shannon Index, 
Gini-Simpson Index, Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA), non-metric 
multidimensional scaling (NMDS), Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size 
(LEfSe), Wilcoxon test, and Spearman's rank correlation.
RESULTS: The results showed that the alpha diversity of oral microbiota was 
higher in psoriasis patients. The relative abundances of certain bacterial taxa 
differed between psoriasis and healthy individuals, including Prevotella, 
Prevotella 7 and Porphyromonas gingivalis, which are increased in psoriasis. We 
also found a positive correlation between Alloprevotella, Porphyromonas, and 
Neisseria with the severity of psoriasis, while Veillonella showed a negative 
correlation.
CONCLUSION: In summary, this study found significant changes in the composition 
of the oral microbiota in patients with psoriasis. Some oral bacteria are 
associated with psoriasis severity. It provides a new perspective on the 
relationship between the oral microbiota and psoriasis.

© 2024 Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S473237
PMCID: PMC11468564
PMID: 39399065

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 10;14(1):23701. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6.

Dysbiotic signatures and diagnostic potential of gut microbial markers for 
inflammatory bowel disease in Korean population.

Kim HS(#)(1), Oh SJ(#)(2), Kim BK(#)(3), Kim JE(2), Kim BH(4)(5), Park YK(3), 
Yang BG(3), Lee JY(6), Bae JW(7)(8)(9), Lee CK(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Research Institute, GI Biome Inc., Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Kyung Hee University 
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)East-West Medical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. gidrlee@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Fecal samples were collected from 640 individuals in Korea, including 523 
patients with IBD (223 with Crohn's disease [CD] and 300 with ulcerative colitis 
[UC]) and 117 healthy controls. The samples were subjected to cross-sectional 
gut metagenomic analysis using 16 S rRNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. 
Patients with IBD, particularly those with CD, exhibited significantly lower 
alpha diversities than the healthy subjects. Differential abundance analysis 
revealed dysbiotic signatures, characterized by an expansion of the genus 
Escherichia-Shigella in patients with CD. Functional annotations showed that 
functional pathways related to bacterial pathogenesis and production of hydrogen 
sulfide (H2S) were strongly upregulated in patients with CD. A dysbiosis score, 
calculated based on functional characteristics, highly correlated with disease 
severity. Markers distinguishing between healthy subjects and patients with IBD 
showed accurate classification based on a small number of microbial taxa, which 
may be used to diagnose ambiguous cases. These findings confirm the taxonomic 
and functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in patients with IBD, especially 
those with CD. Taxa indicative of dysbiosis may have significant implications 
for future clinical research on the management and diagnosis of IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6
PMCID: PMC11467411
PMID: 39390011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Data Brief. 2024 Sep 19;57:110957. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110957. eCollection
 2024 Dec.

Dataset of 16S rRNA gene sequences of 111 healthy and Newcastle disease infected 
caecal samples from multiple chicken breeds of Pakistan.

Ameer A(1)(2), Saleem F(1), Keating C(3)(4), Gundogdu O(5), Ijaz UZ(2)(6)(7), 
Javed S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Water & Environment Research Group, University of Glasgow, Mazumdar-Shaw 
Advanced Research Centre, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Engineering, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.
(4)School of Biodiversity, One Health, and Veterinary Medicine, College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)College of Science and Engineering, University of Galway, Ireland.

The article presents a processed dataset from amplicon sequencing of the V4 
region of the 16S rRNA gene to recover bacterial and archaeal taxa from the 
caeca of multiple chicken breeds of Pakistan. These include chicken breeds 
commonly raised at commercial level, Naked Neck, Black Australorp, Rhode Island 
Red, White Layer, and Broiler. All the breeds were challenged with Newcastle 
Disease Virus (NDV), with vaccination against the disease also explored. This 
resulted in samples belonging to four treatment groups as: Control; Vaccinated; 
Vaccinated and Challenged; and Non-vaccinated and Challenged. These were raised 
on an antibiotic free diet in a semi-controlled farming setup. 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon sequencing of caecal DNA from day old and mature chicken samples (22 
weeks for Naked Neck, Black Australorp, Rhode Island Red and White Layer; 8 
weeks for Broiler) of the four groups was performed. The paired-end reads from 
all the samples were quality trimmed, error corrected, and overlapped, on which 
unique Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were obtained at 99 % similarity. 
Using predictive modelling, the MetaCyc functional pathways, as well as KEGG 
orthologs were also recovered. The generated data may be used to explore 
microbial interactions in gastrointestinal tract with respect to NDV vaccination 
and infection, together with increased understanding of chicken health and 
productivity.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110957
PMCID: PMC11461973
PMID: 39386325

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Nov;14(11):2971-2986. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01281-2. Epub 2024 Oct 10.

Association Between Scalp Microbiota Imbalance, Disease Severity, and Systemic 
Inflammatory Markers in Alopecia Areata.

Gómez-Arias PJ(#)(1)(2), Gay-Mimbrera J(#)(1), Rivera-Ruiz I(1)(2), 
Aguilar-Luque M(1), Juan-Cencerrado M(1)(2), Mochón-Jiménez C(1)(2), 
Gómez-García F(1)(2), Sánchez-González S(3), Ortega-Hernández A(3), Gómez-Garre 
D(4), Parra-Peralbo E(5), Isla-Tejera B(6)(7), Ruano J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Immune-Mediated Chronic Skin Diseases Laboratory, IMIBIC/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, 14004, Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Reina Sofía University Hospital, 14004, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Microbiota, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), 4ª Planta Sur, C/ 
Profesor Martín Lagos, S/N, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Microbiota, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), 4ª Planta Sur, C/ 
Profesor Martín Lagos, S/N, 28040, Madrid, Spain. mgomezgarre@salud.madrid.org.
(5)Department of Pharmacy and Nutrition, Faculty of Biomedical Science and 
Health, Universidad Europea, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Inflammatory Immune-Mediated Chronic Skin Diseases Laboratory, IMIBIC/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, 14004, Córdoba, Spain. 
beatrizislatj@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Reina Sofía University Hospital, 14004, Córdoba, 
Spain. beatrizislatj@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Alopecia areata (AA) is an autoimmune disease causing non-scarring 
hair loss, with both genetic and environmental factors implicated. Recent 
research highlights a possible role for scalp microbiota in influencing both 
local and systemic inflammatory responses, potentially impacting AA progression. 
This study examines the link among scalp microbiota imbalances, AA severity, and 
systemic inflammation.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study with 24 participants, including 
patients with AA of varying severities and healthy controls. Scalp microbial 
communities were analyzed using swab samples and ion torrent sequencing of the 
16S rRNA gene across multiple hypervariable regions. We explored correlations 
among bacterial abundance, microbiome metabolic pathways, and circulating 
inflammatory markers.
RESULTS: Our findings reveal significant dysbiosis in the scalp microbiota of 
patients with AA compared to healthy controls. Severe AA cases had an increased 
presence of pro-inflammatory microbial taxa like Proteobacteria, whereas milder 
cases had higher levels of anti-inflammatory Actinobacteria. Notable species 
differences included abundant gram-negative bacteria such as Alistipes inops and 
Bacteroides pleibeius in severe AA, contrasted with Blautia faecis and 
Pyramydobacter piscolens predominantly in controls. Significantly, microbial 
imbalance correlated with AA severity (SALT scores) and systemic inflammatory 
markers, with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines linked to more severe disease.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that scalp microbiota may play a role in 
AA-related inflammation, although it is unclear whether the shifts are a cause 
or consequence of hair loss. Further research is needed to clarify the causal 
relationship and mechanisms involved.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01281-2
PMCID: PMC11557780
PMID: 39384736

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of Interest Juan Ruano is 
a member of the Editorial Board of Dermatology and Therapy but was not involved 
in the peer review or editorial decisions for this manuscript. All other (Pedro 
J. Gómez-Arias, Jesús Gay-Mimbrera, Irene Rivera-Ruiz, Macarena Aguilar-Luque, 
Miguel Juan-Cencerrado, Carmen Mochón-Jiménez, Francisco Gómez-García, Silvia 
Sánchez-González, Adriana Ortega-Hernández, Dulcenombre Gómez-Garre, Esmeralda 
Parra-Peralbo and Beatriz Isla-Tejera) co-authors declare no conflicts of 
interest. Ethical Approval Reviewed and approved by Provincial Research Ethics 
Committee of Córdoba, Spain; approval # HRP-503, August 2015. The legislation in 
effect in 2015 has not changed in a way that would impact the validity of the 
approval, and the original approved protocol remains relevant to the current 
study. No changes have been made to the study, such as modifications in 
methodology, inclusion of new participants, or alterations in study conditions, 
that would invalidate the initial approval. The research was conducted following 
the standards of good clinical practice and adhering to the principles outlined 
in the by the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 1983, and Belmont 
Report and adhered to Spanish and European laws regarding data privacy. Before 
participation, all patients provided informed consent after receiving and 
reviewing the patient information sheet.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Sep 30;12(1):186. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01897-8.

Stratification of human gut microbiomes by succinotype is associated with 
inflammatory bowel disease status.

Anthamatten L(1)(2), von Bieberstein PR(1), Menzi C(1), Zünd JN(2), Lacroix 
C(2), de Wouters T(3), Leventhal GE(4).

Author information:
(1)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Food Biotechnology, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, 
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland. t.dewouters@pharmabiome.com.
(4)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland. g.leventhal@pharmabiome.com.

BACKGROUND: The human gut microbiome produces and consumes a variety of 
compounds that interact with the host and impact health. Succinate is of 
particular interest as it intersects with both host and microbiome metabolism. 
However, which gut bacteria are most responsible for the consumption of 
intestinal succinate is poorly understood.
RESULTS: We build upon an enrichment-based whole fecal sample culturing approach 
and identify two main bacterial taxa that are responsible for succinate 
consumption in the human intestinal microbiome, Phascolarctobacterium and 
Dialister. These two taxa have the hallmark of a functional guild and are 
strongly mutual exclusive across 21,459 fecal samples in 94 cohorts and can thus 
be used to assign a robust "succinotype" to an individual. We show that they 
differ with respect to their rate of succinate consumption in vitro and that 
this is associated with higher concentrations of fecal succinate. Finally, 
individuals suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more likely to 
have the Dialister succinotype compared to healthy subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified that only two bacterial genera are the key succinate 
consumers in human gut microbiome, despite the fact that many more intestinal 
bacteria encode for the succinate pathway. This highlights the importance of 
phenotypic assays in functionally profiling intestinal microbiota. A 
stratification based on "succinotype" is to our knowledge the first 
function-based classification of human intestinal microbiota. The association of 
succinotype with IBD thus builds a bridge between microbiome function and IBD 
pathophysiology related to succinate homeostasis. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01897-8
PMCID: PMC11441152
PMID: 39350289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.A., P.R.v.B., C.M., T.d.W., and G.E.L. are or 
were employees of PharmaBiome. T.d.W. and C.L. are founders of PharmaBiome. L.A. 
is a co-founder of PharmaBiome. L.A., P.R.v.B., T.d.W., and G.E.L. are inventors 
on the patent application WO 2022/023458 A1 entitled “Microbial Niche Mapping” 
and on the patent application WO 2023/118460 A1 entitled “New biomarker for 
disorders and diseases associated with intestinal dysbiosis”. PharmaBiome 
provided financial support.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Nov 5;12(11):e0096524. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00965-24. 
Epub 2024 Sep 27.

Integrating short- and full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing to elucidate 
microbiome profiles in Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) ponds.

Rajonhson DM(1), Angthong P(1), Thepsuwan T(1), Sutheeworapong S(2), Satanwat 
P(1)(3), Tapaneeyaworawong P(1)(3), Powtongsook S(1)(3), Kruasuwan W(4)(5), 
Jenjaroenpun P(4)(5), Wongsurawat T(4)(5), Chaiyapechara S(1), Rungrassamee 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, National Science 
and Technology Development Agency, Khlong Luang, Pathum Thani, Thailand.
(2)Pilot Plant Development and Training Institute, King Mongkut's University of 
Technology Thonburi, Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Center of Excellence for Marine Biotechnology, Department of Marine Science, 
Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)Division of Medical Bioinformatics, Research Department, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Siriraj Long-read Lab (Si-LoL), Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Despite their immense economic value as a key aquaculture species, the 
production of Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus vannamei) faces significant 
challenges from intensive farming practices and disease outbreaks. Routine 
microbial profiling for disease surveillance could be a promising approach to 
anticipate and control disease outbreaks. To achieve this, accuracy in microbial 
profiling in shrimp ponds is crucial for enabling targeted action and 
prevention. Extensive documentation emphasizes that, beyond biological factors 
(related to the host, diet, or health status during the rearing period), 
technical elements, including sequencing techniques significantly influence 
bacterial community profiling. This study investigated the influence of short- 
and long-read sequencing of 16S rRNA genes on the microbial profiles in shrimp 
intestines, water, and sediments. The origin of the samples (intestine or 
environmental) in shrimp culture ponds primarily drove the observed differences 
in core microbial species. The ecological niches accounted for 56% of bacterial 
community variations in culture ponds. Both sequencing approaches showed 
consistent results in identifying higher-rank taxa and assessing alpha and beta 
diversity. However, at the species level, full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences 
provided better resolution than V3-V4 sequences. For routine microbial profiling 
in shrimp culture ponds, our study suggests that short-read sequences were 
sufficient for determining overall bacterial community.IMPORTANCEThis 
interdisciplinary study investigated the influence of sequencing techniques on 
bacterial communities profiling within Pacific white shrimp (Litopenaeus 
vannamei) ponds. By integrating aquaculture, microbiology, and environmental 
science, we revealed the role of ecological niches and factors like salinity and 
pH on microbiota diversity and composition in shrimp intestines, pond water, and 
sediment. Additionally, we compared the taxonomic resolution using partial 
versus full-length 16S rRNA gene sequences, highlighting the value of longer 
amplicons for precise identification of key taxa. These findings provide novel 
insights into microbial dynamics underlying environmental effects in shrimp 
aquaculture. Comprehensive characterization of the pond microbiome could lead to 
management strategies that promote shrimp health and productivity. Furthermore, 
the potential of a multi-omics approach for integrating complementary data 
streams to elucidate environment-microbiome-host interactions was highlighted.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00965-24
PMCID: PMC11537064
PMID: 39329828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Sep 11;15:1418261. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1418261. 
eCollection 2024.

Bacterial dynamics in the progression of caries to apical periodontitis in 
primary teeth of children with severe early childhood caries.

Lin B(1), Wang J(2), Zhang Y(3).

Author information:
(1)First Clinical Division, Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology 
and National Center of Stomatology and National Clinical Research Center for 
Oral Diseases and National Engineering Research Center of Oral Biomaterials and 
Digital Medical Devices, Beijing, China.
(2)College of Food Science and Nutritional Engineering, China Agricultural 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Dental Materials, Peking University School and Hospital of 
Stomatology and National Center for Stomatology and National Clinical Research 
Center for Oral Diseases and National Engineering Research Center of Oral 
Biomaterials and Digital Medical Devices, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Early childhood caries (ECC) are a prevalent chronic disease in 
young children. However, there has been limited research on the microbiota in 
different tissue levels of the same tooth in children with ECC. This study aimed 
to investigate the dynamic changes in bacterial diversity during the progression 
of Severe Early Childhood Caries (S-ECC) within the same tooth, from the tooth 
surface to the root canal, by collecting tissue samples from different areas of 
the affected tooth.
METHODS: Twenty primary teeth with periapical periodontitis were selected from 
20 children aged 3-5 years, with 100 samples collected from the different 
layers: uncavitated buccal enamel surface without white spot lesion (surface), 
the outermost layer of the dentin carious lesion (superficial), the inner layer 
of carious dentin (deep), necrotic pulp tissue (pulp), and root exudate 
(exudate). The taxonomy of each OTU representative sequence was analyzed against 
the 16S rRNA database. Comparisons of alpha diversity between groups were 
performed. The number of shared and unique genera between groups counted. Beta 
diversity was contrasted to evaluate differences in bacterial community 
composition, and the relationships between the microbiota and samples were 
analyzed. The heatmap analysis of the 30 most abundant genera was used, which 
highlighted their relative distribution and abundance. The significantly 
abundant taxa (phylum to genera) of bacteria among the different groups were 
identified. The differences of relative abundance between bacterial genera among 
the five groups were analyzed. Significant Spearman correlations were noted, and 
visualization of the co-occurrence network was conducted.
RESULTS: Bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed that most genera were present 
in all layers, with the number of shared genera increasing as the disease 
advanced. The bacterial communities and core genera in the co-occurrence network 
changed with progression to severe ECC.
CONCLUSION: An increase in both the quantity and complexity of bacterial 
interactions was observed. This study emphasized the importance of paying 
attention to the relationship between microbial species rather than just 
checking changes in bacterial species structure when investigating the role of 
bacteria in disease progression.

Copyright © 2024 Lin, Wang and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1418261
PMCID: PMC11422202
PMID: 39323882

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2024 Sep 3;11(9):ofae506. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofae506. 
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Gut Microbial and Metabolic Features Associated With Clostridioides difficile 
Infection Recurrence in Children.

Li X(1), Xiao F(1), Wang X(1), Ye L(1), Xiao Y(1), Li D(1), Zhang T(1)(2), Wang 
Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Shanghai Children's 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Gut Microbiota and Metabolic Research Center, Institute of Pediatric 
Infection, Immunity and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is a critical 
clinical issue due to the increase in incidence and difficulty in treatment. We 
aimed to identify gut microbial and metabolic features associated with disease 
recurrence in a group of pediatric CDI patients.
METHODS: A total of 84 children with primary CDI were prospectively enrolled in 
the study. Fecal samples collected at the initial diagnosis were subjected to 
16S rRNA gene sequencing and targeted metabolomics analysis to profile the 
bacterial composition and metabolome.
RESULTS: Twenty-six of 84 (31.0%) pediatric CDI patients experienced recurrence. 
The alpha diversity of the fecal microbiota was significantly lower in the 
recurrent group than in the nonrecurrent group, and the beta diversity was 
different from that of the nonrecurrent group. Taxonomic proﬁles revealed that 
the relative abundances of multiple bacterial taxa significantly differed 
between the recurrent and nonrecurrent groups. Linear discriminant analysis 
effect size analysis identified several bacterial genera that discriminated 
between recurrent and nonrecurrent groups, including Parabacteroides, 
Coprococcus, Dialister, and Clostridium. Recurrent bacteria presented lower 
abundances of several short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria 
(Faecalibacterium, Butyricicoccus, Clostridium, Roseburia, and Ruminococcus), 
which were correlated with reduced fecal SCFA levels. In addition, several bile 
acids, including lithocholic acid (LCA), 12-ketoLCA, trihydroxycholestanoic 
acid, and deoxycholic acid, were decreased in recurrent patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the differing gut microbiota profiles in 
pediatric CDI patients may contribute to disease recurrence by modulating SCFA 
concentrations and bile acid profiles. The gut microbiota and metabolite 
signatures may be used to predict disease recurrence in children with CDI.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofae506
PMCID: PMC11420671
PMID: 39319090

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: No 
potential conflicts of interest.

1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2024 Oct;31(48):58599-58608. doi: 
10.1007/s11356-024-35039-2. Epub 2024 Sep 23.

Prevalence of antibiotic resistance genes, heavy metal, and bacterial community 
composition in sea sediments influenced by Eriocheir sinensis breeding 
aquaculture.

Fu H(#)(1), Sun W(#)(2), Cao Y(1), Li Q(1), Wang X(1), Zhou Z(1), Meng Q(1), Luo 
T(1), Gu W(1)(3), Meng Q(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Aquatic Crustacean Diseases, College of Marine 
Science and Engineering, Nanjing Normal University, 2 Xuelin Road, Nanjing, 
210023, China.
(2)Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Nanjing, 
210009, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Co-Innovation Center for Marine Bio-Industry Technology of Jiangsu Province, 
Lianyungang, 222005, China.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Aquatic Crustacean Diseases, College of Marine 
Science and Engineering, Nanjing Normal University, 2 Xuelin Road, Nanjing, 
210023, China. mlzzcld@aliyun.com.
(5)Co-Innovation Center for Marine Bio-Industry Technology of Jiangsu Province, 
Lianyungang, 222005, China. mlzzcld@aliyun.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Eriocheir sinensis is the main aquaculture species in China. With the continuous 
expansion of the aquaculture scale, the demand for E. sinensis seedlings was 
also increased. The water used in breeding has well-nourished and its discharge 
into the sea posed significant risks. This study sampled the wastewater 
discharge points of the E. sinensis seedlings in Sheyang County, Jiangsu 
Province, and the areas far from the discharge points that were not affected in 
March and May 2023, respectively. A large number of antibiotic resistance genes 
(ARGs) were found in the sediment of the wastewater discharge area, and the 
highest ARG was sulfonamide ARG-sul1 using qPCR analysis, while ARGs were almost 
undetectable in the areas not affected by wastewater discharge. The 16S rRNA 
sequence analysis results showed that the main bacterial phyla at the wastewater 
discharge point were Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, and Thermodesulfobacteria. 
In the control point, the main bacterial phyla were Proteobacteria, 
Chlorobacterium, and Thermodesulfobacteria. There were significant differences 
in the composition of microbial communities between the two points, and the 
samples at the wastewater discharge point were more clustered and had higher 
similarity. The correlation network and redundancy analysis indicated that the 
phyla Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria at the wastewater discharge 
points were positively correlated with most ARGs. The wastewater discharge had 
no effect on heavy metals from the two points. This study sets a foundation for 
future research by identifying key microbial taxa as potential ARG carriers and 
examining the interactions between microbial communities, ARGs, and heavy 
metals.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-024-35039-2
PMID: 39312117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2024 Sep 20;24(1):1020. doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-09948-z.

High abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria in the naso-oropharynx of 
SARS-CoV-2-infected persons in an African population: implications for low 
disease severity.

Akorli J(1), Opoku M(2)(3), Appiah-Twum F(2), Akpo MS(2), Ismail RY(2), Boamah 
GYK(2), Obeng-Aboagye E(4), Adu-Asamoah D(5), Donkor IO(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana. jakorli@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(3)Present address Department of Environment and Genetics, School of 
Agriculture, Biomedicine and Environment, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, 
3086, Australia.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(5)Department of Virology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: The association of the oral microbiome with SARS-CoV-2 infections 
and disease progression has been documented in European, Asian, and American 
populations but not in Africa.
METHODS: We conducted a study in Ghana to evaluate and compare the 
naso-oropharyngeal microbiome in SARS-CoV-2-infected and uninfected persons 
before (pre-vaccine) and after vaccine availability (post-vaccine) in the 
country. 16S rRNA V3-V4 variable region was sequenced and analysed from DNA 
extracted from naso-oropharyngeal swabs.
RESULTS: Considering only the infection status, infected and uninfected groups 
had no difference in their within-group diversity and was evident in the study 
population pre- and post-vaccine availability. The introduction of vaccines 
reduced the diversity of the naso-oropharyngeal microbiome particularly among 
SARS-CoV-2 positive persons and, vaccinated individuals (both infected and 
uninfected) had higher microbial diversity compared to their unvaccinated 
counterparts. SARS-CoV-2-positive and -negative individuals were largely 
compositionally similar varying by 4-7% but considering vaccination*infection 
statuses, the genetic distance increased to 12% (P = 0.003) and was mainly 
influenced by vaccination. Common among the pre- and post-vaccine samples, 
Atopobium and Finegoldia were abundant in infected and uninfected individuals, 
respectively. Bacteria belonging to major butyrate-producing phyla, Bacillota 
(particularly class Clostridia) and Bacteroidota showed increased abundance more 
strikingly in infected individuals before vaccines were available. They reduced 
significantly after vaccines were introduced into the country with Fusobacterium 
and Lachnoanaerobaculum being the only common bacteria between pre-vaccine 
infected persons and vaccinated individuals, suggesting that natural infection 
and vaccination correlate with high abundance of short-chain fatty acids.
CONCLUSION: Our results show, in an African cohort, the abundance of bacteria 
taxa known for their protective pathophysiological processes, especially during 
infection, suggesting that this population is protected against severe COVID-19. 
The immune-related roles of the members of Bacillota and Bacteroidota that were 
found associated with infection and vaccination require further studies, and how 
these may be linked to ethnicity, diet and age. We also recommend expansion of 
microbiome-disease association studies across Africa to identify possible 
bacterial-mediated therapeutics for emerging infections.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-024-09948-z
PMCID: PMC11414296
PMID: 39304808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Anim Microbiome. 2024 Sep 17;6(1):51. doi: 10.1186/s42523-024-00339-y.

The early life microbiome of giant grouper (Epinephelus lanceolatus) larvae in a 
commercial hatchery is influenced by microorganisms in feed.

Lim JY(1)(2), Yeoh YK(3)(4), Canepa M(5), Knuckey R(6)(7), Jerry DR(6)(8)(9), 
Bourne DG(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 
4811, Australia. jy.lim@jcu.edu.au.
(2)The Australian Research Council Industrial Transformation Research Hub (ARC 
ITRH) for Supercharging Tropical Aquaculture through Genetics Solutions, James 
Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia. jy.lim@jcu.edu.au.
(3)Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), Townsville, QLD, 4810, 
Australia.
(4)AIMS@JCU, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(5)Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies (IMAS), University of Tasmania, 
Hobart, TAS, 7001, Australia.
(6)The Australian Research Council Industrial Transformation Research Hub (ARC 
ITRH) for Supercharging Tropical Aquaculture through Genetics Solutions, James 
Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(7)The Company One, Grouper Breeding Facility, Cairns, QLD, 4870, Australia.
(8)Centre for Sustainable Tropical Fisheries and Aquaculture, College of Science 
and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia.
(9)Tropical Futures Institute, James Cook University, Singapore, 387380, 
Singapore.
(10)College of Science and Engineering, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 
4811, Australia. david.bourne@jcu.edu.au.
(11)The Australian Research Council Industrial Transformation Research Hub (ARC 
ITRH) for Supercharging Tropical Aquaculture through Genetics Solutions, James 
Cook University, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia. david.bourne@jcu.edu.au.
(12)Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS), Townsville, QLD, 4810, 
Australia. david.bourne@jcu.edu.au.
(13)AIMS@JCU, Townsville, QLD, 4811, Australia. david.bourne@jcu.edu.au.

Fish health, growth and disease is intricately linked to its associated 
microbiome. Understanding the influence, source and ultimately managing the 
microbiome, particularly for vulnerable early life-stages, has been identified 
as one of the key requirements to improving farmed fish production. One tropical 
fish species of aquaculture importance farmed throughout the Asia-Pacific region 
is the giant grouper (Epinephelus lanceolatus). Variability in the health and 
survival of E. lanceolatus larvae is partially dependent on exposure to and 
development of its early microbiome. Here, we examined the development in the 
microbiome of commercially reared giant grouper larvae, its surrounding 
environment, and that from live food sources to understand the type of bacterial 
species larvae are exposed to, and where some of the sources of bacteria may 
originate. We show that species richness and microbial diversity of the larval 
microbiome significantly increased in the first 4 days after hatching, with the 
community composition continuing to shift over the initial 10 days in the 
hatchery facility. The dominant larval bacterial taxa appeared to be 
predominantly derived from live cultured microalgae and rotifer feeds and 
included Marixanthomonas, Candidatus Hepatincola, Meridianimaribacter and 
Vibrio. In contrast, a commercial probiotic added as part of the hatchery's 
operating procedure failed to establish in the larvae microbiome. Microbial 
source tracking indicated that feed was the largest influence on the composition 
of the giant grouper larvae microbiome (up to 55.9%), supporting attempts to 
modulate fish microbiomes in commercial hatcheries through improved diets. The 
marked abundances of Vibrio (up to 21.7% of 16S rRNA gene copies in larvae) 
highlights a need for rigorous quality control of feed material.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s42523-024-00339-y
PMCID: PMC11406855
PMID: 39289751

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing conflict of 
interest.

1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2024 Oct 1;284:116959. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.116959. Epub 2024 Sep 3.

Gut microbiome and function are altered for individuals living in high fluoride 
concentration areas in Pakistan.

Bibi S(1), Kerbiriou C(2), Uzma(3), Mckirdy S(2), Kostrytsia A(3), Rasheed H(4), 
Eqani SAMAS(5), Gerasimidis K(2), Nurulain SM(6), Ijaz UZ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, 45550, Pakistan; 
Water & Environment Research Group, University of Glasgow, Mazumdar-Shaw 
Advanced Research Centre, Glasgow G11 6EW, UK.
(2)School of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 
2ER, UK.
(3)Water & Environment Research Group, University of Glasgow, Mazumdar-Shaw 
Advanced Research Centre, Glasgow G11 6EW, UK.
(4)National Water Quality Laboratory, Pakistan Council of Research in Water 
Resources (PCRWR), Islamabad, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, 45550, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Biosciences, Grand Asian University Sialkot, Pakistan. 
Electronic address: syednurulain@gaus.edu.pk.
(7)Water & Environment Research Group, University of Glasgow, Mazumdar-Shaw 
Advanced Research Centre, Glasgow G11 6EW, UK; Department of Molecular and 
Clinical Cancer Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7BE, UK; 
National University of Ireland, University Road, Galway H91 TK33, Ireland. 
Electronic address: Umer.Ijaz@glasgow.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Endemic fluorosis refers to the condition when individuals are 
exposed to excessive amounts of fluoride ion due to living in a region 
characterized by elevated levels of fluorine in the drinking water, food, and/or 
air. In Pakistan, a substantial proportion of the population is thereby 
affected, posing a public health concern.
OBJECTIVES: Assessing how the gut microbiota and its metabolic profiles are 
impacted by chronic exposure to fluoride in drinking water (that caused Dental 
Fluorosis) as well as to perceive how this microbiota is connected to adverse 
health outcomes prevailing with fluoride exposure.
METHODS: Drinking water (n=27) and biological samples (n=100) of blood, urine 
and feces were collected from 70 high fluoride exposed (with Dental Fluorosis) 
and 30 healthy control (without Dental Fluorosis) subjects. Water and urinary 
fluoride concentrations were determined. Serum/plasma biochemical testing was 
performed. Fecal DNA extraction, 16S rRNA analysis of microbial taxa, their 
predicted metabolic function and fecal short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) 
quantification were carried out.
RESULTS: The study revealed that microbiota taxonomic shifts and their metabolic 
characterization had been linked to certain host clinical parameters under the 
chronic fluoride exposure. Some sets of genera showed strong specificity to 
water and urine fluoride concentrations, Relative Fat Mass index and SCFAs. The 
SCFAs response in fluoride-exposed samples was observed to be correlated with 
bacterial taxa that could contribute to adverse health effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Microbial dysbiosis as a result of endemic fluorosis exhibits a 
structure that is associated with risk of metabolic deregulation and is 
implicated in various diseases. Our results may form the development of novel 
interventions and may have utility in diagnosis and monitoring.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.116959
PMID: 39232295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. BMC Med. 2024 Sep 4;22(1):358. doi: 10.1186/s12916-024-03562-1.

Effects of fructan and gluten on gut microbiota in individuals with 
self-reported non-celiac gluten/wheat sensitivity-a randomised controlled 
crossover trial.

Herfindal AM(1), Nilsen M(1), Aspholm TE(1), Schultz GIG(2), Valeur J(3)(4), 
Rudi K(1), Thoresen M(5), Lundin KEA(6)(7), Henriksen C(8), Bøhn SK(9).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Norwegian University 
of Life Sciences, P. O. Box 5003, N-1432, Ås, Norway.
(2)Healthy Life Centre, Municipality of Nes, Norway.
(3)Unger-Vetlesen Institute, Lovisenberg Diaconal Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, 
Norway.
(6)Disease Research Centre, Norwegian Coeliac, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, 
Oslo, Norway.
(8)Department of Nutrition, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of 
Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Faculty of Chemistry, Biotechnology and Food Sciences, Norwegian University 
of Life Sciences, P. O. Box 5003, N-1432, Ås, Norway. sivb@nmbu.no.

BACKGROUND: Individuals with non-celiac gluten/wheat sensitivity (NCGWS) 
experience improvement in gastrointestinal symptoms following a gluten-free 
diet. Although previous results have indicated that fructo-oligosaccharides 
(FOS), a type of short-chain fructans, were more likely to induce symptoms than 
gluten in self-reported NCGWS patients, the underlying mechanisms are 
unresolved.
METHODS: Our main objective was therefore to investigate whether FOS-fructans 
and gluten affect the composition and diversity of the faecal microbiota (16S 
rRNA gene sequencing), faecal metabolites of microbial fermentation (short-chain 
fatty acids [SCFA]; gas chromatography with flame ionization detector), and a 
faecal biomarker of gut inflammation (neutrophil gelatinase-associated 
lipocalin, also known as lipocalin 2, NGAL/LCN2; ELISA). In the randomised 
double-blind placebo-controlled crossover study, 59 participants with 
self-reported NCGWS underwent three different 7-day diet challenges with gluten 
(5.7 g/day), FOS-fructans (2.1 g/day), and placebo separately (three periods, 
six challenge sequences).
RESULTS: The relative abundances of certain bacterial taxa were affected 
differently by the diet challenges. After the FOS-fructan challenge, 
Fusicatenibacter increased, while Eubacterium (E.) coprostanoligenes group, 
Anaerotruncus, and unknown Ruminococcaceae genera decreased. The gluten 
challenge was primarily characterized by increased abundance of Eubacterium 
xylanophilum group. However, no differences were found for bacterial diversity 
(α-diversity), overall bacterial community structure (β-diversity), faecal 
metabolites (SCFA), or NGAL/LCN2. Furthermore, gastrointestinal symptoms in 
response to FOS-fructans were generally not linked to substantial shifts in the 
gut bacterial community. However, the reduction in E. coprostanoligenes group 
following the FOS-fructan challenge was associated with increased 
gastrointestinal pain. Finally, correlation analysis revealed that changes in 
gastrointestinal symptoms following the FOS-fructan and gluten challenges were 
linked to varying bacterial abundances at baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, while FOS-fructans induced more gastrointestinal 
symptoms than gluten in the NCGWS patients, we did not find that substantial 
shifts in the composition nor function of the faecal microbiota could explain 
these differences in the current study. However, our results indicate that 
individual variations in baseline bacterial composition/function may influence 
the gastrointestinal symptom response to both FOS-fructans and gluten. 
Additionally, the change in E. coprostanoligenes group, which was associated 
with increased symptoms, implies that attention should be given to these 
bacteria in future trials investigating the impact of dietary treatments on 
gastrointestinal symptoms.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov as NCT02464150.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12916-024-03562-1
PMCID: PMC11373345
PMID: 39227818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. J Nutr. 2024 Aug 31:S0022-3166(24)00474-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tjnut.2024.08.023. 
Online ahead of print.

Association Between Healthy Eating Index-2020 and Oral Microbiome Among 
Postmenopausal Women.

Yue Y(1), Hovey KM(1), Wactawski-Wende J(1), LaMonte MJ(1), Andrews CA(2), Diaz 
PI(3), McSkimming DI(4), Buck M(5), Sun Y(6), Millen AE(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, School of Public Health 
and Health Professions, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, 
Buffalo, NY, United States.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, United States.
(3)Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University at Buffalo, 
NY, United States.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs, National Oncology Program, Washington, 
District of Columbia, United States; Division of Hematology-Oncology, Durham VA 
Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, United States.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Environmental Health, School of Public Health 
and Health Professions, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York, 
Buffalo, NY, United States. Electronic address: aemillen@buffalo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Dietary intake has been suggested to be associated with the oral 
microbiome, but no study has examined the association between overall diet 
quality and the oral microbiome.
OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate the cross-sectional association 
between the Healthy Eating Index-2020 (HEI-2020) and the diversity and 
composition of the oral microbiome among participants in the Buffalo 
Osteoporosis and Periodontal Disease (OsteoPerio) Study.
METHODS: In 1175 postmenopausal women (mean age: 67 ± 7.0 y), we estimated the 
HEI-2020 scores for each woman from a food frequency questionnaire administered 
from 1997 to 2000. Bacterial DNA was extracted from subgingival plaque samples 
and analyzed using 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. The alpha-diversity 
(within-sample diversity) and β-diversity (between-sample diversity) across 
HEI-2020 quartiles were examined using analysis of covariance and permutational 
multivariate analysis of variance, respectively. The associations between the 
HEI-2020 score and the relative abundance of microbial taxa were examined by 
linear regression models. The analyses were further conducted for individual 
components of the HEI-2020.
RESULTS: No statistically significant associations were observed between the 
HEI-2020 scores and alpha- or beta-diversity. However, greater consumption of 
seafood, plant proteins, and total protein and lower consumption of added sugars 
were positively associated with alpha-diversity. After we applied a false 
detection rate (FDR) correction, higher HEI-2020 scores were significantly 
associated with decreased abundance of Lautropia, Streptococcus gordonii, 
Cardiobacterium valvarum, and Cardiobacterium hominis, and increased abundance 
of Selenomonas sp. oral taxon 133 and Selenomonas dianae (FDR-adjusted P values 
< 0.10). Additionally, 28 other taxa were identified as being associated with 
HEI-2020 components.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the HEI-2020 was associated with the composition, but not 
the diversity, of the oral microbiome, individual HEI-2020 components were 
associated with both its diversity and composition. Specific dietary components 
may have more impact on the diversity and composition of oral microbiome than 
overall diet quality assessed by the HEI-2020.

Copyright © 2024 American Society for Nutrition. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tjnut.2024.08.023
PMID: 39218399

1. Pol J Microbiol. 2024 Aug 26;73(3):297-314. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2024-026.

Microbial Diversity and Screening for Potential Pathogens and Beneficial 
Bacteria of Five Jellyfish Species-Associated Microorganisms Based on 16S rRNA 
Sequencing.

Li L(1)(2), Zhu Y(2), Wu F(1), Shen Y(3), Wang Y(4), Höfer J(5), Pozzolini M(6), 
Wang M(7), Xiao L(2), Dai X(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Marine Biological Resources and Management, Shanghai Ocean 
University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Faculty of Naval Medicine, Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Naval Medical 
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jilin Agricultural University, 
Changchun, China.
(5)Escuela de Ciencias del Mar, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso, 
Valparaíso, egión de Valparaíso, Chile.
(6)Department of Earth, Environment and Life Sciences (DISTAV), University of 
Genova, Via Pastore 3, Genova, Italy.
(7)Department of Disease Control and Prevention, Naval Medical Center of PLA, 
Naval Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Jellyfish, microorganisms, and the marine environment collectively shape a 
complex ecosystem. This study aimed to analyze the microbial communities 
associated with five jellyfish species, exploring their composition, diversity, 
and relationships. Microbial diversity among the species was assessed using 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing and QIIME analysis. Significant differences in bacterial 
composition were found, with distinct dominant taxa in each species: 
Mycoplasmataceae (99.21%) in Aurelia coerulea, Sphingomonadaceae (22.81%) in 
Cassiopea andromeda, Alphaproteobacteria_unclassified (family level) (64.09%) in 
Chrysaora quinquecirrha, Parcubacteria_unclassified (family level) (93.11%) in 
Phacellophora camtschatica, and Chlamydiaceae (35.05%) and 
Alphaproteobacteria_unclassified (family level) (38.73%) in Rhopilema 
esculentum. C. andromeda showed the highest diversity, while A. coerulea 
exhibited the lowest. Correlations among dominant genera varied, including a 
positive correlation between Parcubacteria_unclassified (genus level) and 
Chlamydiaceae_unclassified (genus level). Genes were enriched in metabolic 
pathways and ABC transporters. The most abundant potential pathogens at the 
phylum level were Proteobacteria, Tenericutes, Chlamydiae, and 
Epsilonbacteraeota. The differing microbial compositions are likely influenced 
by species and their habitats. Interactions between jellyfish and 
microorganisms, as well as among microorganisms, showed interdependency or 
antagonism. Most microbial gene functions focused on metabolic pathways, 
warranting further study on the relationship between pathogenic bacteria and 
these pathways.

© 2024 Liangzhi Li et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2024-026
PMCID: PMC11398266
PMID: 39214712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors do not report 
any financial or personal connections with other persons or organizations, which 
might negatively affect the contents of this publication and/or claim authorship 
rights to this publication.

1. Res Vet Sci. 2024 Nov;179:105383. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2024.105383. Epub 2024
Aug  20.

Analysis of nasopharyngeal microbiota revealing microbial disturbance associated 
with ovine respiratory complex.

Jiang H(1), Yang L(1), Duan S(2), Wu R(2), Li M(2), Liu B(1), Zhu Y(3), Li J(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, China; National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health and Safety, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, China; National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health and Safety, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address: 
yipingz@cau.edu.cn.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 
100193, China; National Key Laboratory of Veterinary Public Health and Safety, 
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. Electronic address: 
jlivet@cau.edu.cn.

The ovine respiratory complex (ORC) is a complex respiratory disease process in 
ovine causing a significant health concern with substantial morbidity and 
mortality. It poses a significant threat of impacting animal health, leading to 
severe health consequences and considerable economic loss. Research on the upper 
respiratory tract (URT) microbiota is critical for offering insights into 
pathogenesis, prevention, and treatment strategies of ORC. The goal of this 
study is to compare the nasopharyngeal microbiota of clinically healthy Hu sheep 
(Group H) and sheep with ORC (Group P). The 16S rDNA gene amplicon 
high-throughput sequencing technique was applied to identify the microbial 
composition in the nasopharyngeal samples. The results showed that there was no 
significant difference in the microbiota diversity and richness between ORC and 
healthy sheep. However, there were significant differences in microbial 
composition, such as the relative abundance of Enterobacteriaceae, 
Moraxellaceae, Pasteurellaceae, and Streptococcaceae between the two groups. The 
abundance of aerobes in sheep with ORC increased significantly, while the 
abundance of anaerobes and facultative anaerobes decreased significantly. There 
were also differences in the taxa phenotypes associated with biofilm forming, 
mobile element-containing, oxidative stress-tolerance, and potential pathogens 
between the two groups. Our study showed the nasopharyngeal microbiota 
composition and its associated shifts between clinically healthy sheep and ORC 
sheep in China. These findings suggest that shifts in the nasopharyngeal 
microbiota could be a contributing factor to the pathogenesis of ORC, offering a 
potential avenue for the development of targeted interventions and treatments 
for this condition in sheep.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2024.105383
PMID: 39213742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Jul 29:2024.07.27.605455. doi: 
10.1101/2024.07.27.605455.

Differential Patterns of Gut and Oral Microbiomes in Hispanic Individuals with 
Cognitive Impairment.

Wadop YN, Vasquez EL, Mathews JJ, Muhammad JAS, Mavarez RP, Satizabal C, 
Gonzales MM, Tanner J, Maestre G, Fonteh AN, Seshadri S, Kautz TF, Fongang B.

Alzheimer's disease and related dementias (ADRD) have been associated with 
alterations in both oral and gut microbiomes. While extensive research has 
focused on the role of gut dysbiosis in ADRD, the contribution of the oral 
microbiome remains relatively understudied. Furthermore, the potential 
synergistic interactions between oral and gut microbiomes in ADRD pathology are 
largely unexplored. This study aims to evaluate distinct patterns and potential 
synergistic effects of oral and gut microbiomes in a cohort of predominantly 
Hispanic individuals with cognitive impairment (CI) and without cognitive 
impairment (NC). We conducted 16S rRNA gene sequencing on stool and saliva 
samples from 32 participants (17 CI, 15 NC; 62.5% female, mean age = 70.4 ± 6.2 
years) recruited in San Antonio, Texas, USA. Correlation analysis through 
MaAslin2 assessed the relationship between participants' clinical measurements 
(e.g., fasting glucose and blood cholesterol) and their gut and saliva microbial 
contents. Differential abundance analysis evaluated taxa with significant 
differences between CI and NC groups, and alpha and beta diversity metrics 
assessed within-sample and group compositional differences. Our analyses 
revealed no significant differences between NC and CI groups in fasting glucose 
or blood cholesterol levels. However, a clear association was observed between 
gut microbiome composition and levels of fasting glucose and blood cholesterol. 
While alpha and beta diversity metrics showed no significant differences between 
CI and NC groups, differential abundance analysis revealed an increased presence 
of oral genera such as Dialister , Fretibacterium , and Mycoplasma in CI 
participants. Conversely, CI individuals exhibited a decreased abundance of gut 
genera, including Shuttleworthia , Holdemania , and Subdoligranulum , which are 
known for their anti-inflammatory properties. No evidence was found for 
synergistic contributions between oral and gut microbiomes in the context of 
ADRD. Our findings suggest that similar to the gut microbiome, the oral 
microbiome undergoes significant modifications as individuals transition from NC 
to CI. Notably, the identified oral microbes have been previously associated 
with periodontal diseases and gingivitis. These results underscore the necessity 
for further investigations with larger sample sizes to validate our findings and 
elucidate the complex interplay between oral and gut microbiomes in ADRD 
pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.07.27.605455
PMCID: PMC11361189
PMID: 39211240

1. Nutrients. 2024 Aug 18;16(16):2752. doi: 10.3390/nu16162752.

Specific Gut Microbiome Signatures in Children with Cow's Milk Allergy.

Moriki D(1), León ED(2), García-Gamero G(2), Jiménez-Hernández N(2), Artacho 
A(2), Pons X(2), Koumpagioti D(3), Dinopoulos A(1), Papaevangelou V(1), Priftis 
KN(1), Douros K(1), Francino MP(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)3rd Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, "Attikon" University Hospital, 12462 Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Genomics and Health, Fundación Para el Fomento de la 
Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de la Comunitat Valencia (FISABIO), 46020 
Valencia, Spain.
(3)Department of Nursing, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11527 
Athens, Greece.
(4)CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Although gut dysbiosis is associated with cow's milk allergy (CMA), causality 
remains uncertain. This study aimed to identify specific bacterial signatures 
that influence the development and outcome of the disease. We also investigated 
the effect of hypoallergenic formula (HF) consumption on the gut microbiome of 
milk-allergic children. 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing was applied to characterize 
the gut microbiome of 32 milk-allergic children aged 5-12 years and 36 
age-matched healthy controls. We showed that the gut microbiome of children with 
CMA differed significantly from that of healthy children, regardless of whether 
they consumed cow's milk. Compared to that of healthy cow's milk consumers, it 
was depleted in Bifidobacterium, Coprococcus catus, Monoglobus, and 
Lachnospiraceae GCA-900066575, while being enriched in Oscillibacter 
valericigenes, Negativibacillus massiliensis, and three genera of the 
Ruminococcaceae family. Of these, only the Ruminococcaceae taxa were also 
enriched in healthy children not consuming cow's milk. Furthermore, the gut 
microbiome of children who developed tolerance and had received an HF was 
similar to that of healthy children, whereas that of children who had not 
received an HF was significantly different. Our results demonstrate that 
specific gut microbiome signatures are associated with CMA, which differ from 
those of dietary milk elimination. Moreover, HF consumption affects the gut 
microbiome of children who develop tolerance.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16162752
PMCID: PMC11357501
PMID: 39203888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Aug 22;12(8):1733. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12081733.

Characterization of Bacterial Communities on Trout Skin and Eggs in Relation to 
Saprolegnia parasitica Infection Status.

Pavić D(1), Geček S(2), Miljanović A(1), Grbin D(1)(3), Bielen A(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Food Technology and Biotechnology, University of Zagreb, 
Pierottijeva 6, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(2)Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička cesta 54, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Croatian Veterinary Institute, Savska cesta 143, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia.

We have investigated the changes in the microbial communities on the surface of 
trout eggs and the skin of adult trout in relation to the presence of 
Saprolegnia parasitica. This pathogen causes saprolegniosis, a disease 
responsible for significant losses in salmonid farms and hatcheries. It is known 
from other disease systems that the host-associated microbiome plays a crucial 
role in the defence against pathogens, but if the pathogen predominates, this 
can lead to dysbiosis. However, analyses of the effects of S. parasitica on the 
diversity, composition, and function of microbial communities on fish skin and 
eggs are scarce. Thus, we have collected skin swabs from injured and healthy 
trout (N = 12), which differed in S. parasitica load, from three different fish 
farms in Croatia (Kostanjevac, Radovan, and Solin), while trout egg samples (N = 
12) were infected with S. parasitica in the laboratory. Illumina sequencing of 
the V4 region of the 16S rRNA marker gene showed that infection with S. 
parasitica reduced the microbial diversity on the surface of the eggs, as 
evidenced by decreased Pielou's evenness and Shannon's indices. We further 
determined whether the bacterial genera with a relative abundance of >5.0% in 
the egg/skin samples were present at significantly different abundances in 
relation to the presence of S. parasitica. The results have shown that some 
genera, such as Pseudomonas and Flavobacterium, decreased significantly in the 
presence of the pathogen on the egg surface. On the other hand, some bacterial 
taxa, such as Acinetobacter and Janthinobacterium, as well as Aeromonas, were 
more abundant on the diseased eggs and the injured trout skin, respectively. 
Finally, beta diversity analyses (weighted UniFrac, unweighted UniFrac, 
Bray-Curtis) have shown that the sampling location (i.e., fish farm), along with 
S. parasitica infection status, also has a significant influence on the 
microbial communities' composition on the trout skin and eggs, demonstrating the 
strong influence of the environment on the shaping of the host surface 
microbiome. Overall, we have shown that the presence of S. parasitica was 
associated with changes in the diversity and structure of the trout skin/egg 
microbiome. The results obtained could support the development of new strategies 
for the management of saprolegniosis in aquaculture.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12081733
PMCID: PMC11357440
PMID: 39203577

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Jul 24;12(8):1518. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12081518.

Coronal and Root Canal Microbiota in Apical Periodontitis with Different PAI.

Teofani A(1), Libonati A(2), Unida V(3), Biocca S(3), Desideri A(1), Campanella 
V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via della Ricerca 
Scientifica 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences and Translational Medicine, University of 
Rome Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via 
Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.

Apical periodontitis is an inflammatory disease triggered by oral pathogens 
invading necrotic root canals. The aim of this study was to evaluate the coronal 
and root canal bacterial community profiles in primary endodontic infections 
with different periapical (PAI) indices in comparison to oral mucosa controls. A 
total of 31 patients with primary apical periodontitis, 14 with PAI-1 and 17 
with PAI-3 were recruited. Microbial specimens from mucosa (control samples) and 
endodontic necrotic tissues were collected in each patient. Microbiota 
composition was studied through 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicon sequencing 
analysis. Overall, 2953 taxa from 168 different genera of 451 various microbial 
species were retrieved in the controls and PAI-1 and PAI-3 groups. Firmicutes is 
the predominant phylum in the oral controls (34.5%) and PAI-1 (44.4%) groups, 
while Bacteroidetes is predominant in PAI-3 (38.6%). The Proteobacteria (21.5%) 
and Fusobacteria (12.5%) relative abundance is higher in oral controls while 
that of Synergistetes is higher in the PAI-1 (3.5%) and PAI-3 (2.5%) groups, 
being almost absent in controls (less than 0.1%). Most of the increased 
bacterial species found in the PAI groups were strict anaerobes. A diminished 
microbial diversity was found in apical periodontitis with higher PAI. These 
samples were also characterized by an increase in bacteria belonging to phyla 
and genera with an increased anaerobic character.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12081518
PMCID: PMC11356064
PMID: 39203361

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Aug 24;24(1):311. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03461-8.

Alterations in the gut microbiota community are associated with childhood 
obesity and precocious puberty.

Wang L(#)(1), Yi Q(#)(1), Xu H(1)(2), Liu H(1), Tan B(1), Deng H(1), Chen Y(1), 
Wang R(1), Tang F(3), Cheng X(4), Zhu J(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Research Institute, National Clinical Research Center 
for Child Health and Disorders, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics Metabolism and 
Inflammatory Disease, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Department of Endocrine Genetics and Metabolism, School of Medicine, Chengdu 
Women's and Children's Center Hospital, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731, China.
(4)Department of Endocrine Genetics and Metabolism, School of Medicine, Chengdu 
Women's and Children's Center Hospital, University of Electronic Science and 
Technology of China, Chengdu, 611731, China. Chinacxr1216@sina.com.
(5)Department of Pediatric Research Institute, National Clinical Research Center 
for Child Health and Disorders, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child 
Development and Disorders, Chongqing Key Laboratory of Pediatrics Metabolism and 
Inflammatory Disease, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China. jingzhu@cqmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To explore the distribution and differences in the intestinal 
microbiota in girls with obesity-related precocious puberty and the relationship 
between intestinal microbiota and obesity-related precocious puberty.
METHODS: 16 S rRNA gene amplicons from fecal samples from girls with precocious 
puberty and obesity-complicated precocious puberty and healthy children were 
sequenced to define microbial taxa.
RESULTS: The α- and β-diversity indices of the microbiome significantly differed 
among the three groups. At the phylum level, the proportions of Firmicutes, 
Actinobacteriota, Bacteroidota, Bacteria, Campylobacterota, and Acidobacteriota 
were different. At the genus level, there were differences in Bifidobacterium, 
Bacteroides, Anaerostipes, Fusicatenibacter, Klebsiella, Lachnospiraceae, 
ErysipelotrichaceaeUCG-003, Prevotella9, Ruminococcus gnavus group, and 
Lachnoclostridium. Additionally, Bifidobacterium, Anaerostipes, Bacteroides, 
Candidatus Microthrix, Eubacterium hallii group, Klebsiella, and 
Erysipelotrichaceae UCG-003 were identified as bacterial biomarkers by LEfSe. 
Furthermore, Sellimonas, Intestinibacter, Anaerostipes, Ruminococcus gnavus 
group, and Oscillibacter were identified as the differential biomarkers by 
random forest. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to 
evaluate the biomarkers with high predictive value for obesity-related 
precocious puberty. Spearman correlation analysis confirmed that Anaerostipes 
levels were negatively correlated with body weight, body mass index (BMI), bone 
age, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and estradiol.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant correlation between obesity-associated 
precocious puberty and gut microbiota, especially the functional characteristics 
of the microbiome and its interactions, which can provide a theoretical basis 
for the clinical intervention of obesity and precocious puberty through the 
microbiome.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03461-8
PMCID: PMC11344344
PMID: 39182062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interests. 
The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2024 Aug 22;23(1):74. doi: 
10.1186/s12941-024-00735-x.

PneumoniaCheck, a novel aerosol collection device, permits capture of airborne 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis and characterisation of the cough aeromicrobiome in 
people with tuberculosis.

Chiyaka TL(#)(1)(2), Nyawo GR(#)(1)(2), Naidoo CC(1)(2), Moodley S(1)(2), 
Clemente JC(3), Malherbe ST(1), Warren RM(1), Ku DN(4), Segal LN(5), Theron 
G(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, SAMRC 
Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, 
Tygerberg, Cape Town, 7505, South Africa.
(2)African Microbiome Institute, Division of Molecular Biology and Human 
Genetics, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, Cape Town, 7505, South Africa.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(4)George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology, Atlanta, GA, 30332, USA.
(5)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, New York University 
Grossman School of Medicine, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(6)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, SAMRC 
Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of Molecular Biology and Human 
Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, 
Tygerberg, Cape Town, 7505, South Africa. gtheron@sun.ac.za.
(7)African Microbiome Institute, Division of Molecular Biology and Human 
Genetics, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, Cape Town, 7505, South Africa. 
gtheron@sun.ac.za.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    Res Sq. 2024 Apr 11:rs.3.rs-4106141. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4106141/v1.

BACKGROUND: Tuberculosis (TB), a major cause of disease and antimicrobial 
resistance, is spread via aerosols. Aerosols have diagnostic potential and 
airborne-microbes other than Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) may 
influence transmission. We evaluated whether PneumoniaCheck (PMC), a commercial 
aerosol collection device, captures MTBC and the aeromicrobiome of people with 
TB.
METHODS: PMC was done in sputum culture-positive people (≥ 30 forced coughs 
each, n = 16) pre-treatment and PMC air reservoir (bag, corresponding to upper 
airways) and filter (lower airways) washes underwent Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra (Ultra) 
and 16S rRNA gene sequencing (sequencing also done on sputum). In a subset 
(n = 6), PMC microbiota (bag, filter) was compared to oral washes and 
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF).
FINDINGS: 54% (7/13) bags and 46% (6/14) filters were Ultra-positive. Sequencing 
read counts and microbial diversity did not differ across bags, filters, and 
sputum. However, microbial composition in bags (Sphingobium-, Corynebacterium-, 
Novosphingobium-enriched) and filters (Mycobacterium-, Sphingobium-, 
Corynebacterium-enriched) each differed vs. sputum. Furthermore, sequencing only 
detected Mycobacterium in bags and filters but not sputum. In the subset, bag 
and filter microbial diversity did not differ vs. oral washes or BALF but 
microbial composition differed. Bags vs. BALF were Sphingobium-enriched and 
Mycobacterium-, Streptococcus-, and Anaerosinus-depleted (Anaerosinus also 
depleted in filters vs. BALF). Compared to BALF, none of the aerosol-enriched 
taxa were enriched in oral washes or sputum.
INTERPRETATION: PMC captures aerosols with Ultra-detectable MTBC and MTBC is 
more detectable in aerosols than sputum by sequencing. The aeromicrobiome is 
distinct from sputum, oral washes and BALF and contains differentially-enriched 
lower respiratory tract microbes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12941-024-00735-x
PMCID: PMC11342687
PMID: 39175010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 3;12(10):e0077824. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00778-24. 
Epub 2024 Aug 20.

Distinct biogeographic patterns for bacteria and fungi in association with 
Bursaphelenchus xylophilus nematodes and infested pinewood.

Cao Y(#)(1), Yang N(#)(1), Gu J(2), Zhang X(3), Ye J(4), Chen J(1), Li H(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Ningbo Key Laboratory of Port Biological and Food Safety Testing (Technical 
Centre of Ningbo Customs/Ningbo Inspection and Quarantine Science Technology 
Academy), No. 8, Huikang Road, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315100, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Forest Protection of National Forestry and Grassland 
Administration, Ecology and Nature Conservation Institute, Chinese Academy of 
Forestry, Beijing 100091, China.
(4)Co-Innovation Centre for Sustainable Forestry in Southern China, Forestry and 
Grassland, College of Soil and Water Conservation, Nanjing Forestry University, 
Nanjing 210037, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Pinewood nematodes (PWN, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus) are destructive plant 
parasitic nematodes that cause pine wilt disease (PWD) by attacking the vascular 
systems of pine trees, resulting in widespread tree mortality. Research has 
shown that there are connections between nematode-associated microbes and PWD. 
Yet the variations in microbial communities across different geographic regions 
are not well-understood. In this study, we examined the bacterial and fungal 
communities associated with nematodes and infested wood collected from 34 sites 
across three vegetation zones in China, as well as samples from the United 
States, using 16S rRNA and internal transcribed spacer (ITS) gene amplicon 
sequencing. The predominant genera Pseudomonas and Rhodococcus were found in 
nematodes, and Acinetobacter was present in the wood of PWD-infected pine trees 
across China. Network analysis revealed that core bacterial taxa belonged to the 
Pseudomonadota and Actinomycetota phyla for the nematodes, whereas the 
Pseudomonadota and Bacteroidota phyla were dominant in the infested wood. 
Identification of enriched key microbial taxa in nematodes and infested wood 
across vegetation zones indicates distinct biogeographic microbial community 
structures and key bacterial species. Although the nematode-associated bacterial 
community showed consistency across geographic distances, the similarity of the 
PWD pine trees' bacterial community decreased with distance, suggesting a 
spatial correlation with environmental variables. Our findings enhance our 
understanding of the microbiota associated with pinewood nematode (PWN) and 
offer valuable insights into PWD management.
IMPORTANCE: Our research uncovered specific bacteria and fungi linked to 
pinewood nematode (PWN) and infested wood in three different vegetation zones in 
China, as well as samples from the United States. This sheds light on the 
critical roles of certain microbial groups, such as Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, 
and Stenotrophomonas, in influencing PWN fitness. Understanding these patterns 
provides valuable insights into the dynamics of PWN-associated microbiomes, 
offering potential strategies for managing pine wilt disease (PWD). We found 
significant correlations between geographic distance and similarity in bacterial 
communities in the infested wood, indicating a spatial influence on 
wood-associated microbial communities due to limited dispersal and localized 
environmental conditions. Further investigations of these spatial patterns and 
driving forces are crucial for understanding the ecological processes that shape 
microbial communities in complex ecosystems and, ultimately, for mitigating the 
transmission of PWN in forests.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00778-24
PMCID: PMC11448397
PMID: 39162557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 3;12(10):e0003124. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00031-24. 
Epub 2024 Aug 20.

The core microbiome of cultured Pacific oyster spat is affected by age but not 
mortality.

Cho A(#)(1)(2), Finke JF(#)(3)(4), Zhong KX(4), Chan AM(4), Saunders R(5), 
Schulze A(6), Warne S(5), Miller KM(6), Suttle CA(1)(2)(4)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(2)Department of Botany, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(3)Hakai Institute, Heriot Bay, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences, The University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)RKS Labs, Parksville, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Pacific Biological Station, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Nanaimo, Canada.
(7)Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries, The University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

The Pacific oyster is the most widely cultured shellfish worldwide, but 
production has been affected by mortality events, including in hatcheries that 
supply the seed for growers. Several pathogens cause disease in oysters, but in 
many cases, mortality events cannot be attributed to a single agent and appear 
to be multifactorial, involving environmental variables and microbial 
interactions. As an organism's microbiome can provide resilience against 
pathogens and environmental stressors, we investigated the microbiomes in 
cohorts of freshly settled oyster spat, some of which experienced notable 
mortality. Deep sequencing of 16S rRNA gene fragments did not show a significant 
difference among the microbiomes of cohorts experiencing different mortality 
levels, but revealed a characteristic core microbiome comprising 74 taxa. 
Irrespective of mortality, the relative abundance of taxa in the core 
microbiomes changed significantly as the spat aged, yet remained distinct from 
the microbial community in the surrounding water. The core microbiome was 
dominated by bacteria in the families Rhodobacteraceae, Nitrosomonadaceae, 
Flavobacteriaceae, Pirellulaeceae, and Saprospiraceae. Within these families, 14 
taxa designated as the "Hard-Core Microbiome" were indicative of changes in the 
core microbiome as the spat aged. The variability in diversity and richness of 
the core taxa decreased with age, implying niche occupation. As well, there was 
exchange of microbes with surrounding water during development of the core 
microbiome. The shift in the core microbiome demonstrates the dynamic nature of 
the microbiome as oyster spat age.IMPORTANCEThe Pacific oyster (Magallana gigas, 
also known as Crassostrea gigas) is the most widely cultivated shellfish and is 
important to the economy of many coastal communities. However, high mortality of 
spat during the first few days following metamorphosis can affect the seed 
supply to oyster growers. Here, we show that the microbiome composition of 
recently settled oyster spat experiencing low or high mortality was not 
significantly different. Instead, development of the core microbiome was 
associated with spat aging and was partially driven by dispersal through the 
water. These findings imply the importance of early-stage rearing conditions for 
spat microbiome development in aquaculture facilities. Furthermore, shellfish 
growers could gain information about the developmental state of the oyster spat 
microbiome by assessing key taxa. Additionally, the study provides a baseline 
microbiome for future hypothesis testing and potential probiotic applications on 
developing spat.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00031-24
PMCID: PMC11448229
PMID: 39162495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Respir Res. 2024 Aug 14;25(1):308. doi: 10.1186/s12931-024-02931-x.

The clinical impacts of lung microbiome in bronchiectasis with fixed airflow 
obstruction: a prospective cohort study.

Chen YF(1)(2)(3), Hou HH(4), Chien N(5), Lu KZ(6), Lin CH(7)(8), Liao YC(8), Lor 
KL(9), Chien JY(2)(6), Chen CM(9), Chen CY(1)(2)(3), Cheng SL(10)(11), Wang 
HC(6)(12), Hsueh PR(13)(14)(15)(16), Yu CJ(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Yun-Lin 
Branch, Yunlin County, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, 7 Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan (ROC).
(3)Thoracic Medicine Center, Department of Medicine and Surgery, National Taiwan 
University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Yunlin County, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Oral Biology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Medical Imaging, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, College 
of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Big Data Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, 
Zhunan, Miaoli, 350, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Medicine and College of 
Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(10)Division of Thoracic Medicine, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, New Taipei 
City, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Yuan Ze 
University, Taoyuan City 320, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Medicine, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(13)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(14)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Internal Medicine, China Medical 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(15)School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(16)Ph.D Programme for Aging, College of Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(17)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National 
Taiwan University, 7 Chung-Shan South Road, Taipei, 100, Taiwan (ROC). 
jefferycjyu@ntu.edu.tw.
(18)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. 
jefferycjyu@ntu.edu.tw.
(19)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Hsin-Chu Branch, Hsin-Chu, Taiwan. jefferycjyu@ntu.edu.tw.

BACKGROUND: Airflow obstruction is a hallmark of disease severity and prognosis 
in bronchiectasis. The relationship between lung microbiota, airway 
inflammation, and outcomes in bronchiectasis with fixed airflow obstruction 
(FAO) remains unclear. This study explores these interactions in bronchiectasis 
patients, with and without FAO, and compares them to those diagnosed with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
METHODS: This prospective observational study in Taiwan enrolled patients with 
either bronchiectasis or COPD. To analyze the lung microbiome and assess 
inflammatory markers, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were collected for 
16S rRNA gene sequencing. The study cohort comprised 181 patients: 86 with COPD, 
46 with bronchiectasis, and 49 with bronchiectasis and FAO, as confirmed by 
spirometry.
RESULTS: Patients with bronchiectasis, with or without FAO, had similar 
microbiome profiles characterized by reduced alpha diversity and a predominance 
of Proteobacteria, distinctly different from COPD patients who exhibited more 
Firmicutes, greater diversity, and more commensal taxa. Furthermore, compared to 
COPD and bronchiectasis without FAO, bronchiectasis with FAO showed more severe 
disease and a higher risk of exacerbations. A significant correlation was found 
between the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and increased airway neutrophilic 
inflammation such as Interleukin [IL]-1β, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
[TNF]-α, as well as with higher bronchiectasis severity, which might contribute 
to an increased risk of exacerbations. Moreover, in bronchiectasis patients with 
FAO, the ROSE (Radiology, Obstruction, Symptoms, and Exposure) criteria were 
employed to classify individuals as either ROSE (+) or ROSE (-), based on 
smoking history. This classification highlighted differences in clinical 
features, inflammatory profiles, and slight microbiome variations between ROSE 
(-) and ROSE (+) patients, suggesting diverse endotypes within the 
bronchiectasis with FAO group.
CONCLUSION: Bronchiectasis patients with FAO may exhibit two distinct endotypes, 
as defined by ROSE criteria, characterized by greater disease severity and a 
lung microbiome more similar to bronchiectasis without FAO than to COPD. The 
significant correlation between Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization and 
increased airway neutrophilic inflammation, as well as disease severity, 
underscores the clinical relevance of microbial patterns. This finding 
reinforces the potential role of these patterns in the progression and 
exacerbations of bronchiectasis with FAO.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-024-02931-x
PMCID: PMC11325704
PMID: 39143556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 3;12(10):e0366223. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.03662-23. 
Epub 2024 Aug 13.

Characterization of differences in seed endophytic microbiome in conventional 
and organic rice by amplicon-based sequencing and culturing methods.

Khanal S(1), Imran M(2), Zhou X-G(1), Antony-Babu S(3).

Author information:
(1)Texas A&M AgriLife Research Center, Beaumont, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Faisalabad, Faisalabad, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, Texas A&M University, College 
Station, Texas, USA.

The seed serves as the primary source for establishing microbial populations in 
plants across subsequent generations, influencing plant growth and overall 
health. Cropping conditions, especially farming practices, can influence the 
composition and functionality of the seed microbiome. Very little is known about 
the differences in seed microbiome between organic and conventional production 
systems. In this study, we characterized the endophytic microbial populations in 
seeds of rice grown under organic and conventional management practices through 
culture-dependent and -independent analyses. The V4 region of 16S rRNA was used 
for bacterial taxa identification, and the ITS1 region was used for the 
identification of fungal taxa. Our results revealed significantly higher Shannon 
and Simpson indices for bacterial diversity in the conventional farming system, 
whereas the fungal diversity was higher for observed, Shannon, and Simpson 
indices in the organic farming system. The cultivable endophytic bacteria were 
isolated and identified using the full-length 16S rRNA gene. There was no 
difference in culturable endophytic bacterial isolates in rice seeds grown under 
both conventional and organic farming systems. Among 33 unique isolates tested 
in vitro, three bacteria-Bacillus sp. ST24, Burkholderia sp. OR5, and Pantoea 
sp. ST25-showed antagonistic activities against Marasmius graminum, Rhizoctonia 
solani AG4, and R. solani AG11, the fungal pathogens causing seedling blight in 
rice.
IMPORTANCE: In this paper, we studied the differences in the endophytic 
microbial composition of rice seeds grown in conventional and organic farming 
systems. Our results demonstrate a greater bacterial diversity in conventional 
farming, while organic farming showcases a higher fungal diversity. 
Additionally, our research reveals the ability of seed bacterial endophytes to 
inhibit the growth of three fungal pathogens responsible for causing seedling 
blight in rice. This study provides valuable insights into the potential use of 
beneficial seed microbial endophytes for developing a novel microbiome-based 
strategy in the management of rice diseases. Such an approach has the potential 
to enhance overall plant health and improve crop productivity.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.03662-23
PMCID: PMC11448069
PMID: 39136439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Jul 24;15:1384583. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1384583. 
eCollection 2024.

Evaluation of fecal microbiota of late gestation sows in relation to pelvic 
organ prolapse risk.

Kiefer ZE(1), Koester LR(2)(3), Studer JM(1), Schmitz-Esser S(1)(3), Ross JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, United States.
(2)Department of Veterinary Microbiology and Preventive Medicine, Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA, United States.
(3)Interdepartmental Microbiology Graduate Program, Iowa State University, Ames, 
IA, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Sow mortality in the U.S. swine industry has increased in recent 
years, for which pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is a major contributor, accounting 
for 21% of all sow mortality. Dysbiosis of microbial communities has been 
associated with disease and reproductive dysfunction in several species, and 
previous studies have shown changes in vaginal microbiota in sows with increased 
risk for POP during late gestation. However, there is insufficient knowledge 
surrounding the potential relationship between fecal microbiota and POP in sows. 
Therefore, the study objective was to identify differences in sow fecal 
microbiota and determine if fecal and vaginal microbial communities are 
correlated in relation to POP risk.
METHODS: Sows were evaluated for POP risk using an established perineal scoring 
system, with a perineal score (PS) of 1 (PS1) presuming little to no risk of POP 
to a PS of 3 (PS3) presuming high risk of POP. In the current study, 2,864 sows 
were scored during gestation week 15, and 1.0%, 2.7%, and 23.4% of PS1, PS2, and 
PS3 sows, respectively, subsequently experienced POP. Fecal swabs (n = 215) were 
collected between gestation days 108-115, DNA was extracted, and 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon sequencing libraries were analyzed using mothur, phyloseq and SAS in 
reference to PS and POP outcome. Additionally, co-occurrence networks were 
constructed using CoNet to compare fecal and vaginal microbiota from the same 
cohort of sows and identify correlations between different taxa.
RESULTS: Differences in fecal community composition (PERMANOVA; P < 0.05), 
structure (alpha diversity measurements; P < 0.05), and 13 individual 
operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were revealed between PS1 and PS3 assigned 
sows. No differences in fecal microbiota were detected as a result of POP 
outcome. However, the abundances of several taxa were correlated across sample 
collection sites, suggesting the fecal and vaginal microbial communities may be 
related to one another.
DISCUSSION: Collectively, fewer differences in the fecal microbiota exist in 
sows with differing risk for POP compared to the vaginal microbiota, suggesting 
the vaginal microbiome may be more relevant in relation to POP outcome, although 
correlations between fecal and vaginal communities may provide insight for 
strategies to combat POP.

Copyright © 2024 Kiefer, Koester, Studer, Schmitz-Esser and Ross.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1384583
PMCID: PMC11303877
PMID: 39113840

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Microbiol Res. 2024 Oct;287:127863. doi: 10.1016/j.micres.2024.127863. Epub
2024  Aug 3.

Adaptability of the gut microbiota of the German cockroach Blattella germanica 
to a periodic antibiotic treatment.

Marín-Miret J(1), Pérez-Cobas AE(2), Domínguez-Santos R(3), Pérez-Rocher B(3), 
Latorre A(1), Moya A(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), University of Valencia 
and Spanish Research Council, Paterna, Valencia 46980, Spain; Genomic and Health 
Area, Foundation for the Promotion of Sanitary and Biomedical Research of the 
Valencia Region, Valencia 46020, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Ramón y Cajal Institute for Health Research 
(IRYCIS), Ramón y Cajal University Hospital, Madrid, Spain; CIBER in Infectious 
Diseases (CIBERINFEC), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), University of Valencia 
and Spanish Research Council, Paterna, Valencia 46980, Spain.
(4)Institute for Integrative Systems Biology (I2SysBio), University of Valencia 
and Spanish Research Council, Paterna, Valencia 46980, Spain; Genomic and Health 
Area, Foundation for the Promotion of Sanitary and Biomedical Research of the 
Valencia Region, Valencia 46020, Spain. Electronic address: andres.moya@uv.es.

High-throughput sequencing studies have shown that diet or antimicrobial 
treatments impact animal gut microbiota equilibrium. However, properties related 
to the gut microbial ecosystem stability, such as resilience, resistance, or 
functional redundancy, must be better understood. To shed light on these 
ecological processes, we combined advanced statistical methods with 16 S rRNA 
gene sequencing, functional prediction, and fitness analyses in the gut 
microbiota of the cockroach Blattella germanica subject to three periodic pulses 
of the antibiotic (AB) kanamycin (n=512). We first confirmed that AB did not 
significantly affect cockroaches' biological fitness, and gut microbiota changes 
were not caused by insect physiology alterations. The sex variable was examined 
for the first time in this species, and no statistical differences in the gut 
microbiota diversity or composition were found. The comparison of the gut 
microbiota dynamics in control and treated populations revealed that (1) AB 
treatment decreases diversity and completely disrupts the co-occurrence networks 
between bacteria, significantly altering the gut community structure. (2) 
Although AB also affected the genetic composition, functional redundancy would 
explain a smaller effect on the functional potential than on the taxonomic 
composition. (3) As predicted by Taylor's law, AB generally affected the most 
abundant taxa to a lesser extent than the less abundant taxa. (4) Taxa follow 
different trends in response to ABs, highlighting "resistant taxa," which could 
be critical for community restoration. (5) The gut microbiota recovered faster 
after the three AB pulses, suggesting that gut microbiota adapts to repeated 
treatments.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micres.2024.127863
PMID: 39106785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. PLoS One. 2024 Aug 6;19(8):e0308010. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308010. 
eCollection 2024.

Associations of upper respiratory mucosa microbiota with Rheumatoid arthritis, 
autoantibodies, and disease activity.

Joo YB(1)(2), Lee J(3)(4), Park YJ(5), Bang SY(1)(2), Kim K(3)(4), Lee HS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Hanyang University 
Guri Hospital, Guri, Republic of Korea.
(2)Hanyang University Institute for Rheumatology Research, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.
(3)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, St. Vincent's 
Hospital, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2024 Sep 16;19(9):e0310785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0310785.

The lung is recognized as a site for initiating the formation of self-antigen 
and autoimmune responses in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We aimed to investigate 
the association of upper respiratory microbiota with RA, autoantibody 
production, and disease activity. Forty-six patients with RA and 17 controls 
were examined. Nasopharyngeal swab samples were sequenced for microbiome 
profiling using the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene. The microbial diversity 
and relative abundance were compared between RA patients and controls. 
Correlation analyses were conducted to evaluate the relationship between 
microbial abundance and clinical markers such as autoantibodies and disease 
activity. Microbial diversity analysis revealed no major differences between RA 
patients and healthy controls. However, beta diversity analysis indicated a 
subtle distinction in microbial composition (unweighted UniFrac distance) 
between the two groups (P = 0.03), hinting at a minor subset of microbiota 
associated with disease status. Differential abundance analysis uncovered 
specific taxa at various taxonomic levels, including Saccharibacteria (TM7) 
[O-1] (PFDR = 2.53 × 10-2), TM7 [F-1] (PFDR = 5.20 × 10-3), Microbacterium (PFDR 
= 3.37 × 10-4), and Stenotrophomonas (PFDR = 2.57 × 10-3). The relative 
abundance of ten genera correlated significantly with anti-cyclic citrullinated 
peptide (anti-CCP) antibody levels (PFDR < 0.05) and 11 genera were 
significantly associated with disease activity markers, including ESR, CRP, 
DAS28-ESR, and DAS-CRP (PFDR < 0.05). In particular, Saccharibacteria TM7 [G-3] 
and Peptostreptococcaceae [XI] [G-1] were correlated with all disease activity 
biomarkers. Dysbiosis in the upper respiratory mucosa is associated with RA, 
anti-CCP antibody levels, and disease activity.

Copyright: © 2024 Joo et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308010
PMCID: PMC11302903
PMID: 39106279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. BMC Vet Res. 2024 Aug 1;20(1):340. doi: 10.1186/s12917-024-04125-5.

Association of microbial community structure with gill disease in marine-stage 
farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar); a yearlong study.

Clinton M(1)(2)(3), Wyness AJ(4)(5), Martin SAM(6), Brierley AS(4), Ferrier 
DEK(7).

Author information:
(1)Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK. 
mclinton@sitkascience.org.
(2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, 
AK, USA. mclinton@sitkascience.org.
(3)Sitka Sound Science Center, Alaska, Sitka, USA. mclinton@sitkascience.org.
(4)Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK.
(5)Scottish Association for Marine Science, Oban, UK.
(6)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, 
UK.
(7)Scottish Oceans Institute, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK. 
dekf@st-andrews.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the relationship between resident microbiota and 
disease in cultured fish represents an important and emerging area of study. 
Marine gill disorders in particular are considered an important challenge to 
Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) aquaculture, however relatively little is known 
regarding the role resident gill microbiota might play in providing protection 
from or potentiating different gill diseases. Here, 16S rRNA sequencing was used 
to examine the gill microbiome alongside fish health screening in farmed 
Atlantic salmon. Results were used to explore the relationship between microbial 
communities and gill disease.
RESULTS: Microbial community restructuring was observed throughout the sampling 
period and linked to varied drivers of change, including environmental 
conditions and severity of gill pathology. Taxa with significantly greater 
relative abundance on healthier gills included isolates within genus Shewanella, 
and taxa within family Procabacteriaceae. In contrast, altered abundance of 
Candidatus Branchiomonas and Rubritalea spp. were associated with damaged gills. 
Interestingly, more general changes in community richness and diversity were not 
associated with altered gill health, and thus not apparently deleterious to 
fish. Gross and histological gill scoring demonstrated seasonal shifts in gill 
pathology, with increased severity of gill damage in autumn. Specific infectious 
causes that contributed to observed pathology within the population included the 
gill disorder amoebic gill disease (AGD), however due to the uncontrolled nature 
of this study and likely mixed contribution of various causes of gill disease to 
observed pathology results do not strongly support an association between the 
microbial community and specific infectious or non-infectious drivers of gill 
pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that the microbial community of farmed Atlantic 
salmon gills undergo continual restructuring in the marine environment, with 
mixed influences upon this change including environmental, host, and pathogenic 
factors. A significant association of specific taxa with different gill health 
states suggests these taxa might make meaningful indicators of gill health. 
Further research with more frequent sampling and deliberate manipulation of 
gills would provide important advancement of knowledge in this area. Overall, 
although much is still to be learnt regarding what constitutes a healthy or 
maladapted gill microbial community, the results of this study provide clear 
advancement of the field, providing new insight into the microbial community 
structure of gills during an annual production cycle of marine-stage farmed 
Atlantic salmon.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12917-024-04125-5
PMCID: PMC11293161
PMID: 39090695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Genome Med. 2024 Jul 31;16(1):94. doi: 10.1186/s13073-024-01364-x.

Meta-analysis identifies common gut microbiota associated with multiple 
sclerosis.

Lin Q(1)(2), Dorsett Y(2), Mirza A(3), Tremlett H(3), Piccio L(4)(5), Longbrake 
EE(6), Choileain SN(6), Hafler DA(6), Cox LM(7), Weiner HL(7), Yamamura T(8), 
Chen K(9), Wu Y(1), Zhou Y(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, 
CT, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(4)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.
(5)Brain and Mind Centre, School of Medical Sciences, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Departments of Neurology and Immunobiology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06511, USA.
(7)Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Harvard Medical School, Brigham & 
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(8)Department of Immunology, National Institute of Neuroscience, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Statistics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA.
(10)Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, 
CT, USA. yazhou@uchc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have identified a diverse group of microbial taxa 
that differ between patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and the healthy 
population. However, interpreting findings on MS-associated microbiota is 
challenging, as there is no true consensus. It is unclear whether there is gut 
microbiota commonly altered in MS across studies.
METHODS: To answer this, we performed a meta-analysis based on the 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing data from seven geographically and technically diverse studies 
comprising a total of 524 adult subjects (257 MS and 267 healthy controls). 
Analysis was conducted for each individual study after reprocessing the data and 
also by combining all data together. The blocked Wilcoxon rank-sum test and 
linear mixed-effects regression were used to identify differences in microbial 
composition and diversity between MS and healthy controls. Network analysis was 
conducted to identify bacterial correlations. A leave-one-out sensitivity 
analysis was performed to ensure the robustness of the findings.
RESULTS: The microbiome community structure was significantly different between 
studies. Re-analysis of data from individual studies revealed a lower relative 
abundance of Prevotella in MS across studies, compared to controls. 
Meta-analysis found that although alpha and beta diversity did not differ 
between MS and controls, a higher abundance of Actinomyces and a lower abundance 
of Faecalibacterium were reproducibly associated with MS. Additionally, network 
analysis revealed that the recognized negative Bacteroides-Prevotella 
correlation in controls was disrupted in patients with MS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis identified common gut microbiota associated with 
MS across geographically and technically diverse studies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-024-01364-x
PMCID: PMC11293023
PMID: 39085949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YZ holds shares at General Biomics Inc. HT has, 
in the last 5 years, received research support from the Canada Research Chair 
Program, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society, the Canadian Institutes of 
Health Research, the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Canada, the Multiple 
Sclerosis Scientific Research Foundation, and the EDMUS Foundation (“Fondation 
EDMUS contre la sclérose en plaques”) and, in addition, in the last 5 years, has 
had travel expenses or registration fees prepaid or reimbursed to present at CME 
conferences from the Consortium of MS Centres (2018), National MS Society 
(2018), ECTRIMS/ACTRIMS (2017–2022), and American Academy of Neurology (2019). 
Speaker honoraria are either declined or donated to an MS charity or to an 
unrestricted grant for use by HT’s research group. EEL has received honoraria 
over the last 5 years for consulting for Bristol Myers Squibb, Genentech, TG 
Therapeutics, NGM Bio, Janssen, Biogen, Genzyme, Alexion, EMD Serono, Celgene, 
and Teva. She has received research support from Genentech, the National 
Institutes of Health (NIH K23 NS107624 and KL2 TR001862), the Race to Erase MS, 
and the Robert E Leet and Clara Guthrie Patterson Trust. She is an assistant 
editor for Annals of Neurology. The remaining authors declare that they have no 
competing interests.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 15;25(14):7745. doi: 10.3390/ijms25147745.

No Evidence of Gut Microbiota Alteration in Psoriasis Patients Switching to 
Brodalumab after Loss of TNFα Inhibition Effect.

Vižlin A(1), Andersch Björkman Y(1)(2), Kumar Y(3), Göthe M(3), Gillstedt 
M(1)(2), Osmančević A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Institute of Clinical Sciences, 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Region Västra Götaland, 413 45 Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Eurofins Genomics, 78467 Konstanz, Germany.

Biological agents used to treat severe psoriasis may alter the gut microbiota, 
though current knowledge is limited. This study examines whether switching from 
TNFα inhibitors, from which patients had reduced or lost effect, to brodalumab, 
an IL-17 inhibitor, affects the gut microbiota in patients with psoriasis and 
how these changes correlate with the clinical variables of psoriasis severity 
and depressive symptoms. Fecal samples from patients were collected before the 
treatment switch and 12 weeks after the switch and were analyzed for the 
microbiota composition using next-generation sequencing targeting the V3-V5 
region of the 16S rRNA gene, followed by bioinformatics analysis. No significant 
changes in overall gut microbiota composition were observed after the treatment 
switch, although individual variations in the Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes ratio 
were noted, and no significant correlations with clinical variables were found. 
These findings suggest that short-term changes in gut microbiota in patients 
with psoriasis are limited and that dysbiosis may be influenced by the interplay 
of various microbial populations rather than specific taxa. This study provides 
a foundation for further research into the effects of biological treatments on 
the gut microbiota in patients with psoriasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25147745
PMCID: PMC11277239
PMID: 39062988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Amra Osmančević has participated or held 
lectures in AB for AbbVie, Celgene/Amgen, Eli Lilly, Novartis, Pfizer, Meda, 
UCB-Pharma, Janssen Cilag, Allmiral, Kyowa Kirin, Sanofi, Bristol-Myers Squbb, 
Recordati Rare Diseases, and Leo Pharma and conducted clinical trials for 
Novartis, Abbvie, Leo Pharma, Celgene, Janssen Cilag, UCB-Pharma, and Boehringer 
Ingelheim.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Jul 19;24(1):268. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03425-y.

Adolescent gut microbiome imbalance and its association with immune response in 
inflammatory bowel diseases and obesity.

Joo M(1), Nam S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Gachon Advanced Institute for 
Health Sciences and Technology (GAIHST), Gachon University, Incheon, 21999, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Gachon Advanced Institute for 
Health Sciences and Technology (GAIHST), Gachon University, Incheon, 21999, 
Korea. nams@gachon.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Genome Medicine and Science, AI Convergence Center for Medical 
Science, Gachon Institute of Genome Medicine and Science, Gachon University Gil 
Medical Center, Gachon University College of Medicine, Dokjeom-Ro 3Beon-Gil, 
38-13, Namdong-Gu, Incheon, 21565, Republic of Korea. nams@gachon.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Recently, there has been an increase in the number of studies 
focusing on the association between the gut microbiome and obesity or 
inflammatory diseases, especially in adults. However, there is a lack of studies 
investigating the association between gut microbiome and gastrointestinal (GI) 
diseases in adolescents.
METHOD: We obtained 16S rRNA-seq datasets for gut microbiome analysis from 202 
adolescents, comprising ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease (CD), obesity 
(Ob), and healthy controls (HC). We utilized Quantitative Insights Into 
Microbial Ecology (QIIME) and Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by 
Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) to acquire Operational Taxonomic 
Units (OTUs). Subsequently, we analyzed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) Orthology (KO) terms and pathway enrichment for the identified OTUs.
RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the difference between the gut 
microbiomes in adolescents with GI diseases and those in healthy adolescents 
using 202 samples of 16S rRNA sequencing data. The distribution of the six main 
gut microbiota (i.e., unclassified Dorea, unclassified Lachnospiraceae, 
unclassified Ruminococcus, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella copri, 
unclassified Sutterella) was different based on the status of obesity and 
inflammatory diseases. Dysbiosis was observed within Lachnospiraceae in 
adolescents with inflammatory diseases (i.e., UC and CD), and in adolescents 
with obesity within Prevotella and Sutterella. More specifically, our results 
showed that the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and 
unclassified Lachnospiraceae was more than 10% and 8% higher, respectively, in 
the UC group compared to the CD, Ob, and HC groups. Additionally, the Ob group 
had over 20% and over 3% higher levels of Prevotella copri and unclassified 
Sutterella, respectively, compared to the UC, CD, and HC groups. Also, 
inspecting associations between the six specific microbiota and KO terms, we 
found that the six microbiota -relating KO terms were associated with NOD-like 
receptor signaling. These six taxa differences may affect the immune system and 
inflammatory response by affecting NOD-like receptor signaling in the host 
during critical adolescence.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we discovered that dysbiosis of the microbial 
community had varying degrees of influence on the inflammatory and immune 
response pathways in adolescents with inflammatory diseases and obesity.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03425-y
PMCID: PMC11264842
PMID: 39030520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Jul 3;15:1401056. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1401056. 
eCollection 2024.

Unravelling the role of gut microbiota in acute pancreatitis: integrating 
Mendelian randomization with a nested case-control study.

Qu C(#)(1)(2), Lu J(#)(2), Chen Y(#)(3), Li J(2), Xu X(2), Li F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Peking University First Hospital, Peking 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking 
University Health Science Centre, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Gut microbiota may influence the development of acute pancreatitis 
(AP), a serious gastrointestinal disease with high morbidity and mortality. This 
study aimed to identify a causal link by investigating the relationship between 
gut microbiota and AP.
METHODS: Mendelian randomization (MR) and a nested case-control study were used 
to explore associations between gut microbiota composition and AP. 16S rRNA 
sequencing, random forest modelling (RF), support vector machine (SVM), and 
Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was applied to identify significant gut 
microbiota and their correlation with hospitalization duration in AP patients.
RESULTS: Bidirectional MR results confirmed a causal link between specific gut 
microbiota and AP (15 and 8 microbial taxa identified via forward and reverse 
MR, respectively). The 16S rRNA sequencing analysis demonstrated a pronounced 
difference in gut microbiota composition between cases and controls. Notably, 
after a comprehensive evaluation of the results of RF and SVM, Bacteroides 
plebeius (B. plebeius) was found to play a significant role in influencing the 
hospital status. Using a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the 
predictive power (0.757) of B. plebeius. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis offered 
further insight that patients with an elevated abundance of B. plebeius 
experienced prolonged hospital stays.
CONCLUSION: Combining MR with nested case-control studies provided a detailed 
characterization of interactions between gut microbiota and AP. B. plebeius was 
identified as a significant contributor, suggesting its role as both a precursor 
and consequence of AP dynamics. The findings highlight the multifactorial nature 
of AP and its complex relationship with the gut microbiota. This study lays the 
groundwork for future therapeutic interventions targeting microbial dynamics in 
AP treatment.

Copyright © 2024 Qu, Lu, Chen, Li, Xu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1401056
PMCID: PMC11253135
PMID: 39021624

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Front Vet Sci. 2024 Jul 3;11:1401561. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2024.1401561. 
eCollection 2024.

Swine farm environmental microbiome: exploring microbial ecology and 
functionality across farms with high and low sanitary status.

Marin C(1), Migura-García L(2)(3), Rodríguez JC(4), Ventero MP(4), Pérez-Gracia 
MT(5), Vega S(1), Tort-Miró C(2)(3), Marco-Fuertes A(1), Lorenzo-Rebenaque L(6), 
Montoro-Dasi L(1).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Veterinaria, Instituto de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad 
Cardenal Herrera-CEU, CEU Universities, Valencia, Spain.
(2)IRTA, Programa de Sanitat Animal, CReSA, Collaborating Centre of the World 
Organisation for Animal Health for Research and Control of Emerging and 
Re-Emerging Pig Diseases in Europe, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unitat mixta d'Investigació IRTA-UAB en Sanitat Animal, Centre de Recerca en 
Sanitat Animal (CReSA), Campus de la Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Microbiology Department, Dr. Balmis University General Hospital, Microbiology 
Division, Miguel Hernández University, ISABIAL, Alicante, Spain.
(5)Área de Microbiología, Departamento de Farmacia, Instituto de Ciencias 
Biomédicas, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Cardenal Herrera-CEU, 
CEU Universities, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Institute of Science and Animal Technology, Universitat Politècnica de 
Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Stringent regulations in pig farming, such as antibiotic control 
and the ban on certain additives and disinfectants, complicate disease control 
efforts. Despite the evolution of microbial communities inside the house 
environment, they maintain stability over the years, exhibiting characteristics 
specific to each type of production and, in some cases, unique to a particular 
company or farm production type. In addition, some infectious diseases are 
recurrent in specific farms, while other farms never present these diseases, 
suggesting a connection between the presence of these microorganisms in animals 
or their environment. Therefore, the aim of this study was to characterise 
environmental microbiomes of farms with high and low sanitary status, 
establishing the relationships between both, health status, environmental 
microbial ecology and its functionality.
METHODS: For this purpose, 6 pig farms were environmentally sampled. Farms were 
affiliated with a production company that handle the majority of the pigs 
slaughtered in Spain. This study investigated the relationship among high health 
and low health status farms using high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing. In 
addition, to identify ecologically relevant functions and potential pathogens 
based on the 16S rRNA gene sequences obtained, functional Annotation with 
PROkaryotic TAXa (FAPROTAX) was performed.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: This study reveals notable differences in microbial 
communities between farms with persistent health issues and those with good 
health outcomes, suggesting a need for protocols tailored to address specific 
challenges. The variation in microbial populations among farms underscores the 
need for specific and eco-friendly cleaning and disinfection protocols. These 
measures are key to enhancing the sustainability of livestock farming, ensuring 
safer products and boosting competitive edge in the market.

Copyright © 2024 Marin, Migura-García, Rodríguez, Ventero, Pérez-Gracia, Vega, 
Tort-Miró, Marco-Fuertes, Lorenzo-Rebenaque and Montoro-Dasi.

DOI: 10.3389/fvets.2024.1401561
PMCID: PMC11252001
PMID: 39021414

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

1. J Appl Microbiol. 2024 Jul 2;135(7):lxae178. doi: 10.1093/jambio/lxae178.

Exploring the effects of Saorilao-4 on the gut microbiota of pulmonary fibrosis 
model rats based on 16S rRNA sequencing.

Song X(1), Fu X(1), Niu S(1), Wang P(2), Qi J(3), Shi S(1), Chang H(1), Bai 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Baotou Medical College, Baotou 014040, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Baotou 014030, 
China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Baotou 014010, 
China.

AIMS: Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is a progressive and incurable lung disease for 
which treatment options are limited. Here, we aimed to conduct an exploratory 
study on the effects of the Mongolian medicine Saorilao-4 (SRL) on the gut 
microbiota structure, species abundance, and diversity of a rat PF model as well 
as the mechanisms underlying such effects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat fecal samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing 
technology. Bioinformatic and correlation analyses were performed on microbiota 
data to determine significant associations. SRL substantially attenuated the 
adverse effects exerted by PF on the structure and diversity of gut microbiota 
while regulating its alpha and beta diversities. Linear discriminant analysis 
effect size enabled the identification of 62 differentially abundant microbial 
taxa. Gut microbiota abundance analysis revealed that SRL significantly 
increased the relative abundance of bacterial phyla such as Firmicutes and 
Bacteroidetes. Moreover, SRL increased the proportion of beneficial bacteria, 
such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteriales, decreased the proportion of 
pathogenic bacteria, such as Rikenellaceae, and balanced the gut microbiota by 
regulating metabolic pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: SRL may attenuate PF by regulating gut microbiota. This exploratory 
study establishes the groundwork for investigating the metagenomics of PF.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Applied 
Microbiology International.

DOI: 10.1093/jambio/lxae178
PMID: 39020259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 24;25(13):6904. doi: 10.3390/ijms25136904.

Environmental Enrichment Prevents Gut Dysbiosis Progression and Enhances Glucose 
Metabolism in High-Fat Diet-Induced Obese Mice.

Manzo R(1), Gallardo-Becerra L(2), Díaz de León-Guerrero S(1), Villaseñor T(1), 
Cornejo-Granados F(2), Salazar-León J(1), Ochoa-Leyva A(2), Pedraza-Alva G(1), 
Pérez-Martínez L(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunobiología, Departamento de Medicina Molecular y 
Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
(UNAM), Cuernavaca 62210, Morelos, Mexico.
(2)Departamento de Microbiología Molecular, Instituto de Biotecnología, 
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Cuernavaca 62210, Morelos, 
Mexico.

Obesity is a global health concern implicated in numerous chronic degenerative 
diseases, including type 2 diabetes, dyslipidemia, and neurodegenerative 
disorders. It is characterized by chronic low-grade inflammation, gut microbiota 
dysbiosis, insulin resistance, glucose intolerance, and lipid metabolism 
disturbances. Here, we investigated the therapeutic potential of environmental 
enrichment (EE) to prevent the progression of gut dysbiosis in mice with 
high-fat diet (HFD)-induced metabolic syndrome. C57BL/6 male mice with obesity 
and metabolic syndrome, continuously fed with an HFD, were exposed to EE. We 
analyzed the gut microbiota of the mice by sequencing the 16s rRNA gene at 
different intervals, including on day 0 and 12 and 24 weeks after EE exposure. 
Fasting glucose levels, glucose tolerance, insulin resistance, food intake, 
weight gain, lipid profile, hepatic steatosis, and inflammatory mediators were 
evaluated in serum, adipose tissue, and the colon. We demonstrate that EE 
intervention prevents the progression of HFD-induced dysbiosis, reducing taxa 
associated with metabolic syndrome (Tepidimicrobium, Acidaminobacteraceae, and 
Fusibacter) while promoting those linked to healthy physiology (Syntrophococcus 
sucrumutans, Dehalobacterium, Prevotella, and Butyricimonas). Furthermore, EE 
enhances intestinal barrier integrity, increases mucin-producing goblet cell 
population, and upregulates Muc2 expression in the colon. These alterations 
correlate with reduced systemic lipopolysaccharide levels and attenuated colon 
inflammation, resulting in normalized glucose metabolism, diminished adipose 
tissue inflammation, reduced liver steatosis, improved lipid profiles, and a 
significant reduction in body weight gain despite mice's continued HFD 
consumption. Our findings highlight EE as a promising anti-inflammatory strategy 
for managing obesity-related metabolic dysregulation and suggest its potential 
in developing probiotics targeting EE-modulated microbial taxa.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25136904
PMCID: PMC11241766
PMID: 39000013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 12;14(1):16158. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-60225-0.

Familial clustering of dysbiotic oral and fecal microbiomes in juvenile 
dermatomyositis.

Koester ST(#)(1)(2), Chow A(#)(3)(4), Pepper-Tunick E(5), Lee P(6), Eckert 
M(7)(8), Brenchley L(9), Gardner P(9)(10), Song HJ(6), Li N(1), Schiffenbauer 
A(11), Volochayev R(11), Bayat N(11)(12), McLean JS(13), Rider LG(11), Shenoi 
S(3)(7), Stevens AM(3)(7)(14), Dey N(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Translational Science and Therapeutics Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, USA.
(5)Molecular Engineering and Sciences Institute, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)School of Dentistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(9)Office of the Clinical Director, NIDCR, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Oral Oncology at BC Cancer, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(11)Environmental Autoimmunity Group, Clinical Research Branch, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(12)Social and Scientific Systems, Inc., A DLH Holdings Corp. Company, Silver 
Spring, MD, USA.
(13)Department of Periodontics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(14)Janssen, a Wholly Owned Subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, Raritan, USA.
(15)Translational Science and Therapeutics Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA. ndey@fredhutch.org.
(16)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. ndey@fredhutch.org.
(17)Microbiome Research Initiative, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, 
USA. ndey@fredhutch.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is a rare immune-mediated disease of childhood 
with putative links to microbial exposures. In this multi-center, prospective, 
observational cohort study, we evaluated whether JDM is associated with discrete 
oral and gut microbiome signatures. We generated 16S rRNA sequencing data from 
fecal, saliva, supragingival, and subgingival plaque samples from JDM probands 
(n = 28). To control for genetic and environmental determinants of microbiome 
community structure, we also profiled microbiomes of unaffected family members 
(n = 27 siblings, n = 26 mothers, and n = 17 fathers). Sample type 
(oral-vs-fecal) and nuclear family unit were the predominant variables 
explaining variance in microbiome diversity, more so than having a diagnosis of 
JDM. The oral and gut microbiomes of JDM probands were more similar to their own 
unaffected siblings than they were to the microbiomes of other JDM probands. In 
a sibling-paired within-family analysis, several potentially immunomodulatory 
bacterial taxa were differentially abundant in the microbiomes of JDM probands 
compared to their unaffected siblings, including Faecalibacterium (gut) and 
Streptococcus (oral cavity). While microbiome features of JDM are often shared 
by unaffected family members, the loss or gain of specific fecal and oral 
bacteria may play a role in disease pathogenesis or be secondary to immune 
dysfunction in susceptible individuals.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-60225-0
PMCID: PMC11245510
PMID: 38997299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Aug 6;12(8):e0404623. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.04046-23. 
Epub 2024 Jul 11.

Integrative analysis of microbiome and metabolome revealed the effect of 
microbial inoculant on microbial community diversity and function in 
rhizospheric soil under tobacco monoculture.

Lai X(1), Duan W(2), Zhang W(1), Peng Z(1), Wang X(2), Wang H(3), Qi X(1), Pi 
H(1), Chen K(1), Yan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Panxi Crops Research and Utilization Key Laboratory of Sichuan Province, 
Xichang University, Liangshan, China.
(2)China Tobacco Sichuan Industrial Co. Ltd, Chengdu, China.
(3)Sichuan Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, College of 
Life Sciences, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Over-application of chemical fertilizers and continuous cropping obstacles 
seriously restrict the sustainable development of tobacco production. Localized 
fertilization of beneficial microbes has potential advantages in achieving 
higher productivity, but the underlying biological mechanisms of interactions 
between rhizospheric microorganisms and the related metabolic cycle remain 
poorly characterized. Here, an integrative analysis of microbiomes with 
non-targeted metabolomics was performed on 30 soil samples of rhizosphere, root 
surrounding, and bulk soils from flue-cured tobacco under continuous and 
non-continuous monocropping systems. The analysis was conducted using UPLC-MS/MS 
platforms and high-throughput amplicon sequencing targeting the bacterial 16S 
rRNA gene and fungal ITS gene. The microbial inoculant consisted of Bacillus 
subtilis, B. velezensis, and B. licheniformis at the ratio of 1:1:1 in effective 
microbial counts, improved the cured leaf yield and disease resistance of 
tobacco, and enhanced nicotine and nitrogen contents of tobacco leaves. The 
bacterial taxa Rhizobium, Pseudomonas, Sphingomonadaceae, and Burkholderiaceae 
of the phylum Proteobacteria accumulated in high relative abundance and were 
identified as biomarkers following the application of the microbial inoculant. 
Under continuous monocropping, metabolomics demonstrated that the application of 
the microbial inoculant significantly affected the soil metabolite spectrum, and 
the differential metabolites were significantly enriched to the synthesis and 
degradation of nicotine (nicotinate and nicotinamide metabolism and biosynthesis 
of alkaloids derived from nicotinic acid). In addition, microbes were closely 
related to the accumulation of metabolites through correlation analysis. The 
interactions between plant roots and rhizospheric microorganisms provide 
valuable information for understanding how these beneficial microbes affect 
complex biological processes and the adaption capacity of plants to 
environments.IMPORTANCEThis study elaborated on how the microbial fertilizer 
significantly changed overall community structures and metabolite spectrum of 
rhizospheric microbes, which provide insights into the process of rhizosphere 
microbial remolding in response to continuous monocropping. we verified the 
hypothesis that the application of the microbial inoculant in continuous 
cropping would lead to the selection of distinct microbiota communities by 
establishing models to correlate biomarkers. Through correlation analysis of the 
microbiome and metabolome, we proved that rhizospheric microbes were closely 
related to the accumulation of metabolites, including the synthesis and 
degradation of nicotine. The interactions between plant roots and rhizospheric 
microorganisms provide valuable information for understanding how these 
beneficial microbes affect complex biological processes and the adaption 
capacity of plants to environments.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.04046-23
PMCID: PMC11302352
PMID: 38989997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Jul 9:izae124. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izae124. Online ahead
of  print.

Treatment of Active Crohn's Disease With Exclusive Enteral Nutrition Diminishes 
the Immunostimulatory Potential of Fecal Microbial Products.

Kerbiriou C(1), Dickson C(1), Nichols B(1), Logan M(1), Mascellani A(2), Havlik 
J(2), Russell RK(3), Hansen R(4)(5), Milling S(6), Gerasimidis K(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, Glasgow Royal 
Infirmary, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Food Science, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Royal 
Hospital for Sick Children and Young People, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Royal 
Hospital for Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(5)Division of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Department of Child Health, 
School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) is an effective treatment for 
active Crohn's disease (CD). This study explored the immunostimulatory potential 
of a cell-free fecal filtrate and related this with changes in the fecal 
microbiota and metabolites in children with active CD undertaking treatment with 
EEN.
METHODS: Production of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) from peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells was measured following their stimulation with cell-free fecal 
slurries from children with CD, before, during, and at completion of EEN. The 
metabolomic profile of the feces used was quantified using proton nuclear 
magnetic resonance and their microbiota composition with 16S ribosomal RNA 
sequencing.
RESULTS: Following treatment with EEN, 8 (72%) of 11 patients demonstrated a 
reduction in fecal calprotectin (FC) >50% and were subsequently labeled FC 
responders. In this subgroup, TNFα production from peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells was reduced during EEN (P = .008) and reached levels like healthy control 
subjects. In parallel to these changes, the fecal concentrations of acetate, 
butyrate, propionate, choline, and uracil significantly decreased in FC 
responders, and p-cresol significantly increased. At EEN completion, TNFα 
production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was positively correlated 
with butyrate (rho = 0.70; P = .016). Microbiota structure (β diversity) was 
influenced by EEN treatment, and a total of 28 microbial taxa changed 
significantly in fecal calprotectin responders. At EEN completion, TNFα 
production positively correlated with the abundance of fiber fermenters from 
Lachnospiraceae_UCG-004 and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and negatively with 
Hungatella and Eisenbergiella tayi.
CONCLUSIONS: This study offers proof-of concept data to suggest that the 
efficacy of EEN may result from modulation of diet-dependent microbes and their 
products that cause inflammation in patients with CD.

Plain Language Summary: Treatment of active Crohn’s disease with exclusive 
enteral nutrition diminishes the proinflammatory potential of fecal microbial 
components, hence suggesting a mechanism of action involving modulation of 
diet-dependent microbes and their products that cause gut inflammation.

© 2024 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izae124
PMID: 38982655

1. J Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2024 Jul 30;30(3):332-342. doi: 10.5056/jnm22191.

Impact of Esophageal Motility on Microbiome Alterations in Symptomatic 
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease Patients With Negative Endoscopy: Exploring the 
Role of Ineffective Esophageal Motility and Contraction Reserve.

Wong MW(1)(2), Lo IH(3), Wu WK(3)(4)(5), Liu PY(3), Yang YT(3), Chen CY(6), Wu 
MS(3)(5), Wong SH(7), Lei WY(1), Yi CH(1), Liu TT(1), Hung JS(1), Liang SW(1), 
Gyawali CP(8), Chen CL(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Hualien Tzu Chi Hospital, Buddhist Tzu Chi Medical 
Foundation and Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(2)School of Post-Baccalaureate Chinese Medicine, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Departments of Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(5)Departments of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Life Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
(7)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, MI, USA.
(9)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Ineffective esophageal motility (IEM) is common in patients 
with gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and can be associated with poor 
esophageal contraction reserve on multiple rapid swallows. Alterations in the 
esophageal microbiome have been reported in GERD, but the relationship to 
presence or absence of contraction reserve in IEM patients has not been 
evaluated. We aim to investigate whether contraction reserve influences 
esophageal microbiome alterations in patients with GERD and IEM.
METHODS: We prospectively enrolled GERD patients with normal endoscopy and 
evaluated esophageal motility and contraction reserve with multiple rapid 
swallows during high-resolution manometry. The esophageal mucosa was biopsied 
for DNA extraction and 16S ribosomal RNA gene V3-V4 (Illumina)/full-length 
(Pacbio) amplicon sequencing analysis.
RESULTS: Among the 56 recruited patients, 20 had normal motility (NM), 19 had 
IEM with contraction reserve (IEM-R), and 17 had IEM without contraction reserve 
(IEM-NR). Esophageal microbiome analysis showed a significant decrease in 
microbial richness in patients with IEM-NR when compared to NM. The beta 
diversity revealed different microbiome profiles between patients with NM or 
IEM-R and IEM-NR (P = 0.037). Several esophageal bacterial taxa were 
characteristic in patients with IEM-NR, including reduced Prevotella spp. and 
Veillonella dispar, and enriched Fusobacterium nucleatum. In a microbiome-based 
random forest model for predicting IEM-NR, an area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve of 0.81 was yielded.
CONCLUSIONS: In symptomatic GERD patients with normal endoscopic findings, the 
esophageal microbiome differs based on contraction reserve among IEM. Absent 
contraction reserve appears to alter the physiology and microbiota of the 
esophagus.

DOI: 10.5056/jnm22191
PMCID: PMC11238106
PMID: 38972868

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 3;14(1):15335. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-65320-w.

Prediction of anastomotic insufficiency based on the mucosal microbiome prior to 
colorectal surgery: a proof-of-principle study.

Lehr K(1), Lange UG(2), Hipler NM(1), Vilchez-Vargas R(1), Hoffmeister A(3), 
Feisthammel J(3), Buchloh D(4), Schanze D(5), Zenker M(5), Gockel I(2), Link 
A(#)(6), Jansen-Winkeln B(#)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty 
of Medicine, Section of Molecular Gastroenterology and Microbiota-Associated 
Diseases, Otto Von Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(2)Clinic and Polyclinic for Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular 
Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Clinic and Polyclinic for Oncology, Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Pneumology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Clinic for General and Visceral Surgery, Protestant Deaconess House Leipzig, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Otto Von Guericke 
University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Faculty 
of Medicine, Section of Molecular Gastroenterology and Microbiota-Associated 
Diseases, Otto Von Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany. 
alexander.link@med.ovgu.de.
(7)Clinic and Polyclinic for Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular 
Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. 
boris.jansen-winkeln@sanktgeorg.de.
(8)Clinic for General, Visceral, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Clinic St. Georg 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. boris.jansen-winkeln@sanktgeorg.de.
(#)Contributed equally

Anastomotic leakage (AL) is a potentially life-threatening complication 
following colorectal cancer (CRC) resection. In this study, we aimed to unravel 
longitudinal changes in microbial structure before, during, and after surgery 
and to determine if microbial alterations may be predictive for risk assessment 
between sufficient anastomotic healing (AS) and AL prior surgery. We analysed 
the microbiota of 134 colon mucosal biopsies with 16S rRNA V1-V2 gene 
sequencing. Samples were collected from three location sites before, during, and 
after surgery, and patients received antibiotics after the initial collection 
and during surgery. The microbial structure showed dynamic surgery-related 
changes at different time points. Overall bacterial diversity and the abundance 
of some genera such as Faecalibacterium or Alistipes decreased over time, while 
the genera Enterococcus and Escherichia_Shigella increased. The distribution of 
taxa between AS and AL revealed significant differences in the abundance of 
genera such as Prevotella, Faecalibacterium and Phocaeicola. In addition to 
Phocaeicola, Ruminococcus2 and Blautia showed significant differences in 
abundance between preoperative sample types. ROC analysis of the predictive 
value of these genera for AL revealed an AUC of 0.802 (p = 0.0013). In summary, 
microbial composition was associated with postoperative outcomes, and the 
abundance of certain genera may be predictive of postoperative complications.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-65320-w
PMCID: PMC11222535
PMID: 38961176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AL: speaker fee from Janssen, Luvos and advisory 
fee from Ferring. All other authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 3;14(1):15292. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-64369-x.

Identification of commensal gut microbiota signatures as predictors of clinical 
severity and disease progression in multiple sclerosis.

Montgomery TL(1), Wang Q(2), Mirza A(3), Dwyer D(2), Wu Q(2), Dowling CA(2), 
Martens JWS(2), Yang J(2), Krementsov DN(4), Mao-Draayer Y(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, VT, 05401, USA.
(2)Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Pharmacoepidemiology in Multiple Sclerosis Research Group, The University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, VT, 05401, USA. Dimitry.Krementsov@uvm.edu.
(5)Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. yangmaodraayer@gmail.com.
(6)Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, Multiple Sclerosis Center of Excellence, 
Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. yangmaodraayer@gmail.com.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Jun 29:2023.06.26.23291875. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.26.23291875.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic autoimmune disease of the central nervous 
system and a leading cause of neurological disability in young adults. Clinical 
presentation and disease course are highly heterogeneous. Typically, disease 
progression occurs over time and is characterized by the gradual accumulation of 
disability. The risk of developing MS is driven by complex interactions between 
genetic and environmental factors, including the gut microbiome. How the 
commensal gut microbiota impacts disease severity and progression over time 
remains unknown. In a longitudinal study, disability status and associated 
clinical features in 58 MS patients were tracked over 4.2 ± 0.98 years, and the 
baseline fecal gut microbiome was characterized via 16S amplicon sequencing. 
Progressor status, defined as patients with an increase in Expanded Disability 
Status Scale (EDSS), were correlated with features of the gut microbiome to 
determine candidate microbiota associated with risk of MS disease progression. 
We found no overt differences in microbial community diversity and overall 
structure between MS patients exhibiting disease progression and 
non-progressors. However, a total of 41 bacterial species were associated with 
worsening disease, including a marked depletion in Akkermansia, Lachnospiraceae, 
and Oscillospiraceae, with an expansion of Alloprevotella, Prevotella-9, and 
Rhodospirillales. Analysis of the metabolic potential of the inferred metagenome 
from taxa associated with progression revealed enrichment in oxidative 
stress-inducing aerobic respiration at the expense of microbial vitamin K2 
production (linked to Akkermansia), and a depletion in SCFA metabolism (linked 
to Oscillospiraceae). Further, as a proof of principle, statistical modeling 
demonstrated that microbiota composition and clinical features were sufficient 
to predict disease progression. Additionally, we found that constipation, a 
frequent gastrointestinal comorbidity among MS patients, exhibited a divergent 
microbial signature compared with progressor status. These results demonstrate a 
proof of principle for the utility of the gut microbiome for predicting disease 
progression in MS in a small well-defined cohort. Further, analysis of the 
inferred metagenome suggested that oxidative stress, vitamin K2, and SCFAs are 
associated with progression, warranting future functional validation and 
mechanistic study.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-64369-x
PMCID: PMC11222390
PMID: 38961134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.L.M, QWang, A.M., D.D., QWu, C.A.D., J.WS.M, 
J.Y., and DK have nothing to disclose. Y Mao-Draayer has served as a consultant 
and/or received grant support from: Acorda, Bayer Pharmaceutical, Chugai, Biogen 
Idec, Celgene/Bristol Myers Squibb, EMD Serono, Sanofi-Genzyme, Genentech, 
Novartis, Horizon, Janssen, Questor, and Teva Neuroscience.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 2;14(1):15188. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-66097-8.

Characterising the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) pouch microbiome in 
lactating and non-lactating females.

Ockert LE(1), McLennan EA(1), Fox S(2)(3), Belov K(1)(4), Hogg CJ(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, 2006, Australia.
(2)Save the Tasmanian Devil Program, NRE Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, 7001, Australia.
(3)Toledo Zoo, 2605 Broadway, Toledo, OH, 43609, USA.
(4)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
(5)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, 2006, Australia. carolyn.hogg@sydney.edu.au.
(6)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. 
carolyn.hogg@sydney.edu.au.
(7)San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, PO BOX 120551, San Diego, CA, 92112, USA. 
carolyn.hogg@sydney.edu.au.

Wildlife harbour a diverse range of microorganisms that affect their health and 
development. Marsupials are born immunologically naïve and physiologically 
underdeveloped, with primary development occurring inside a pouch. Secretion of 
immunological compounds and antimicrobial peptides in the epithelial lining of 
the female's pouch, pouch young skin, and through the milk, are thought to boost 
the neonate's immune system and potentially alter the pouch skin microbiome. 
Here, using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, we characterised the Tasmanian devil 
pouch skin microbiome from 25 lactating and 30 non-lactating wild females to 
describe and compare across these reproductive stages. We found that the 
lactating pouch skin microbiome had significantly lower amplicon sequence 
variant richness and diversity than non-lactating pouches, however there was no 
overall dissimilarity in community structure between lactating and non-lactating 
pouches. The top five phyla were found to be consistent between both 
reproductive stages, with over 85% of the microbiome being comprised of 
Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Fusobacteriota, Actinobacteriota, and Bacteroidota. 
The most abundant taxa remained consistent across all taxonomic ranks between 
lactating and non-lactating pouch types. This suggests that any potential 
immunological compounds or antimicrobial peptide secretions did not 
significantly influence the main community members. Of the more than 16,000 
total identified amplicon sequence variants, 25 were recognised as 
differentially abundant between lactating and non-lactating pouches. It is 
proposed that the secretion of antimicrobial peptides in the pouch act to 
modulate these microbial communities. This study identifies candidate bacterial 
clades on which to test the activity of Tasmanian devil antimicrobial peptides 
and their role in pouch young protection, which in turn may lead to future 
therapeutic development for human diseases.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66097-8
PMCID: PMC11220038
PMID: 38956276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2024 Jul 1;71(3):253-262. doi: 
10.1556/030.2024.02307. Print 2024 Sep 18.

16S rRNA based metagenomic analysis unveils unique oral microbial signatures in 
oral squamous cell carcinoma cases from Coastal Karnataka, India.

Aparna KG(1), Ravindra J(1), Chakraborty G(1), Ballamoole KK(2), Vinaya Kumar 
JR(3), Chakraborty A(1).

Author information:
(1)1Nitte (Deemed to be University), Department of Molecular Genetics and 
Cancer, Nitte University Centre for Science Education and Research (NUCSER), 
Deralakatte, Mangaluru-575018, India.
(2)2Nitte (Deemed to be University), Department of Infectious Diseases and 
Microbial Genomics, Nitte University Centre for Science Education and Research, 
Deralakatte, Mangaluru-575018, India.
(3)3Nitte (Deemed to be University), Department of Surgical Oncology, Justice 
K.S Hegde Charitable Hospital, Deralakatte, Mangaluru-575018, India.

Oral Squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the 14th most frequent cancer with 
300,000 new cases and 100,000 deaths reported annually. Even with advanced 
therapy, the treatment outcomes are poor at advanced stages of the disease. The 
diagnosis of early OSCC is of paramount clinical value given the high mortality 
rate associated with the late stages of the disease. Recently, the role of 
microbiome in the disease manifestation, including oral cancer, has garnered 
considerable attention. But, to establish the role of bacteria in oral cancer, 
it is important to determine the differences in the colonization pattern in 
non-tumour and tumour tissues. In this study, 16S rRNA based metagenomic 
analyses of 13 tumorous and contralateral anatomically matched normal tissue 
biopsies, obtained from patients with advanced stage of OSCC were evaluated to 
understand the correlation between OSCC and oral microbiome. In this study we 
identified Fusobacterium, Prevotella, Capnocytophaga, Leptotrichia, 
Peptostreptococcus, Parvimonas and Bacteroidetes as the most significantly 
enriched taxa in OSCC lesions compared to the non-cancerous tissues. Further, 
PICRUSt2 analysis unveiled enhanced expression of metabolic pathways associated 
with L-lysine fermentation, pyruvate fermentation, and isoleucine biosynthesis 
in those microbes associated with OSCC tissues. These findings provide valuable 
insights into the distinctive microbial signatures associated with OSCC, 
offering potential biomarkers and metabolic pathways underlying OSCC 
pathogenesis. While our focus has primarily centred on microbial signatures, it 
is essential to recognize the pivotal role of host factors such as immune 
responses, genetic predisposition, and the oral microenvironment in shaping OSCC 
development and microbiome composition.

DOI: 10.1556/030.2024.02307
PMID: 38949882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Equine Vet Sci. 2024 Sep;140:105141. doi: 10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105141. Epub 
2024 Jun 27.

Microbial populations vary between the upper and lower respiratory tract, but 
not within biogeographic regions of the lung of healthy horses.

Bishop RC(1), Migliorisi A(2), Holmes JR(3), Kemper AM(2), Band M(4), Austin 
S(2), Aldridge B(2), Wilkins PA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL, USA. Electronic address: rb17@illinois.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, University of Illinois, Urbana, 
IL, USA.
(3)High Performance Computing in Biology, Roy J. Carver Biotechnology Center, 
University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.
(4)Functional Genomics Unit, Roy J. Carver Biotechnology Center, University of 
Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA; Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Israel.

Understanding normal microbial populations within areas of the respiratory tract 
is essential, as variable regional conditions create different niches for 
microbial flora, and proliferation of commensal microbes likely contributes to 
clinical respiratory disease. The objective was to describe microbial population 
variability between respiratory tract locations in healthy horses. Samples were 
collected from four healthy adult horses by nasopharyngeal lavage (NPL), 
transtracheal aspirate (TTA), and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) of six distinct 
regions within the lung. Full-length 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing and microbial 
profiling analysis was performed. There was a large amount of diversity, with 
over 1797 ASVs identified, reduced to 94 taxa after tip agglomeration and 
prevalence filtering. Number of taxa and diversity were highly variable across 
horses, sample types, and BAL locations. Firmicutes, proteobacteria, and 
actinobacteria were the predominant phyla. There was a significant difference in 
richness (Chao1, p = 0.02) and phylogenetic diversity (FaithPD, p = 0.01) 
between NPL, TTA, and BAL. Sample type (p = 0.03) and horse (p = 0.005) 
contributed significantly to Bray-Curtis compositional diversity, while Weighted 
Unifrac metric was only affected by simplified sample type (NPL and TTA vs BAL, 
p = 0.04). There was no significant effect of BAL locations within the lung with 
alpha or beta diversity statistical tests. Overall findings support diverse 
microbial populations that were variable between upper and lower respiratory 
tract locations, but with no apparent difference in microbial populations of the 
six biogeographic regions of the lung, suggesting that BAL fluid obtained 
blindly by standard clinical techniques may be sufficient for future studies in 
healthy horses.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jevs.2024.105141
PMID: 38944129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.

1. mSystems. 2024 Jul 23;9(7):e0039924. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00399-24. Epub 2024
 Jun 27.

Comparison of the full-length sequence and sub-regions of 16S rRNA gene for skin 
microbiome profiling.

Zhang H(#)(1)(2), Wang X(#)(3), Chen A(1), Li S(1)(4), Tao R(5), Chen K(6), 
Huang P(1), Li L(7), Huang J(8), Li C(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Forensic Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Forensic Medicine, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, 
Guizhou, China.
(3)Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Cancer Center, Dalian Medical University, 
Dalian, Liaoning, China.
(4)MOE Key Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Department of Anthropology 
and Human Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Forensic Medicine, Shanghai Forensic Service 
Platform, Ministry of Justice, Academy of Forensic Science, Shanghai, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Cell Engineering of Guizhou Province, Clinical Stem Cell 
Research Institute, Affiliated Hospital of Zunyi Medical University, Zunyi, 
Guizhou, China.
(7)Department of Forensic Medicine, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(8)The Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution Monitoring and Disease Control, 
Ministry of Education, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The skin microbiome plays a pivotal role in human health by providing protective 
and functional benefits. Furthermore, its inherent stability and individual 
specificity present novel forensic applications. These aspects have sparked 
considerable research enthusiasm among scholars across various fields. However, 
the selection of specific 16S rRNA hypervariable regions for skin microbiome 
studies is not standardized and should be validated through extensive research 
tailored to different research objectives and targeted bacterial taxa. Notably, 
third-generation sequencing (TGS) technology leverages the full discriminatory 
power of the 16S gene and enables more detailed and accurate microbial community 
analyses. Here, we conducted full-length 16S sequencing of 141 skin microbiota 
samples from multiple human anatomical sites using the PacBio platform. Based on 
this data, we generated derived 16S sub-region data through an in silico 
experiment. Comparisons between the 16S full-length and the derived variable 
region data revealed that the former can provide superior taxonomic resolution. 
However, even with full 16S gene sequencing, limitations arise in achieving 100% 
taxonomic resolution at the species level for skin samples. Additionally, the 
capability to resolve high-abundance bacteria (TOP30) at the genus level remains 
generally consistent across different 16S variable regions. Furthermore, the 
V1-V3 region offers a resolution comparable with that of full-length 16S 
sequences, in comparison to other hypervariable regions studied. In summary, 
while acknowledging the benefits of full-length 16S gene analysis, we propose 
the targeting of specific sub-regions as a practical choice for skin microbial 
research, especially when balancing the accuracy of taxonomic classification 
with limited sequencing resources, such as the availability of only short-read 
sequencing or insufficient DNA.IMPORTANCESkin acts as the primary barrier to 
human health. Considering the different microenvironments, microbial research 
should be conducted separately for different skin regions. Third-generation 
sequencing (TGS) technology can make full use of the discriminatory power of the 
full-length 16S gene. However, 16S sub-regions are widely used, particularly 
when faced with limited sequencing resources including the availability of only 
short-read sequencing and insufficient DNA. Comparing the 16S full-length and 
the derived variable region data from five different human skin sites, we 
confirmed the superiority of the V1-V3 region in skin microbiota analysis. We 
propose the targeting of specific sub-regions as a practical choice for 
microbial research.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00399-24
PMCID: PMC11264597
PMID: 38934545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Nutrients. 2024 Jun 18;16(12):1929. doi: 10.3390/nu16121929.

Gut Dysbiosis Shaped by Cocoa Butter-Based Sucrose-Free HFD Leads to 
Steatohepatitis, and Insulin Resistance in Mice.

Kochumon S(1), Malik MZ(1), Sindhu S(1), Arefanian H(1), Jacob T(1), Bahman 
F(1), Nizam R(1), Hasan A(1), Thomas R(1), Al-Rashed F(1), Shenouda S(1), Wilson 
A(1), Albeloushi S(1), Almansour N(1), Alhamar G(1), Al Madhoun A(1), Alzaid 
F(1)(2), Thanaraj TA(1), Koistinen HA(3)(4)(5), Tuomilehto J(4)(6), Al-Mulla 
F(1), Ahmad R(1).

Author information:
(1)Dasman Diabetes Institute, Dasman 15462, Kuwait.
(2)Université Paris Cité, INSERM UMR-S1151, CNRS UMR-S8253, Institut Necker 
Enfants Malades, F-75015 Paris, France.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University 
Hospital, 00029 Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Department of Public Health and Welfare, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare, P.O. Box 30, 00271 Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Minerva Foundation Institute for Medical Research, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.
(6)Department of Public Health, University of Helsinki, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: High-fat diets cause gut dysbiosis and promote triglyceride 
accumulation, obesity, gut permeability changes, inflammation, and insulin 
resistance. Both cocoa butter and fish oil are considered to be a part of 
healthy diets. However, their differential effects on gut microbiome 
perturbations in mice fed high concentrations of these fats, in the absence of 
sucrose, remains to be elucidated. The aim of the study was to test whether the 
sucrose-free cocoa butter-based high-fat diet (C-HFD) feeding in mice leads to 
gut dysbiosis that associates with a pathologic phenotype marked by hepatic 
steatosis, low-grade inflammation, perturbed glucose homeostasis, and insulin 
resistance, compared with control mice fed the fish oil based high-fat diet 
(F-HFD).
RESULTS: C57BL/6 mice (5-6 mice/group) were fed two types of high fat diets 
(C-HFD and F-HFD) for 24 weeks. No significant difference was found in the liver 
weight or total body weight between the two groups. The 16S rRNA sequencing of 
gut bacterial samples displayed gut dysbiosis in C-HFD group, with 
differentially-altered microbial diversity or relative abundances. 
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria were highly abundant in C-HFD 
group, while the Verrucomicrobia, Saccharibacteria (TM7), Actinobacteria, and 
Tenericutes were more abundant in F-HFD group. Other taxa in C-HFD group 
included the Bacteroides, Odoribacter, Sutterella, Firmicutes bacterium (AF12), 
Anaeroplasma, Roseburia, and Parabacteroides distasonis. An increased 
Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio in C-HFD group, compared with F-HFD group, 
indicated the gut dysbiosis. These gut bacterial changes in C-HFD group had 
predicted associations with fatty liver disease and with lipogenic, 
inflammatory, glucose metabolic, and insulin signaling pathways. Consistent with 
its microbiome shift, the C-HFD group showed hepatic inflammation and steatosis, 
high fasting blood glucose, insulin resistance, increased hepatic de novo 
lipogenesis (Acetyl CoA carboxylases 1 (Acaca), Fatty acid synthase (Fasn), 
Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (Scd1), Elongation of long-chain fatty acids family 
member 6 (Elovl6), Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (Pparg) and 
cholesterol synthesis (β-(hydroxy β-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (Hmgcr). 
Non-significant differences were observed regarding fatty acid uptake (Cluster 
of differentiation 36 (CD36), Fatty acid binding protein-1 (Fabp1) and efflux 
(ATP-binding cassette G1 (Abcg1), Microsomal TG transfer protein (Mttp) in C-HFD 
group, compared with F-HFD group. The C-HFD group also displayed increased gene 
expression of inflammatory markers including Tumor necrosis factor alpha (Tnfa), 
C-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2), and Interleukin-12 (Il12), as well as a 
tendency for liver fibrosis.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the sucrose-free C-HFD feeding in mice 
induces gut dysbiosis which associates with liver inflammation, steatosis, 
glucose intolerance and insulin resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16121929
PMCID: PMC11207001
PMID: 38931284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Jun 18;12(6):1225. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12061225.

Periodontal Inflammation and Dysbiosis Relate to Microbial Changes in the Gut.

Kamer AR(1), Pushalkar S(2), Hamidi B(1), Janal MN(3), Tang V(1), Annam KRC(1), 
Palomo L(1), Gulivindala D(1), Glodzik L(4), Saxena D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology and Implant Dentistry, College of Dentistry, New 
York University, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010, USA.
(2)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York University, 12 Waverly 
Place, New York, NY 10003, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Health Promotion, College of Dentistry, New 
York University, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010, USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Weill Cornell Medicine, Brain Health Imaging 
Institute Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.
(5)Department of Basic Sciences and Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, 
New York University, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010, USA.

Periodontal disease (PerioD) is a chronic inflammatory disease of dysbiotic 
etiology. Animal models and few human data showed a relationship between oral 
bacteria and gut dysbiosis. However, the effect of periodontal inflammation and 
subgingival dysbiosis on the gut is unknown. We hypothesized that periodontal 
inflammation and its associated subgingival dysbiosis contribute to gut 
dysbiosis even in subjects free of known gut disorders. We evaluated and 
compared elderly subjects with Low and High periodontal inflammation (assessed 
by Periodontal Inflamed Surface Area (PISA)) for stool and subgingival derived 
bacteria (assayed by 16S rRNA sequencing). The associations between 
PISA/subgingival dysbiosis and gut dysbiosis and bacteria known to produce 
short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) were assessed. LEfSe analysis showed that, in Low 
PISA, species belonging to Lactobacillus, Roseburia, and Ruminococcus taxa and 
Lactobacillus zeae were enriched, while species belonging to Coprococcus, 
Clostridiales, and Atopobium were enriched in High PISA. Regression analyses 
showed that PISA associated with indicators of dysbiosis in the gut mainly 
reduced abundance of SCFA producing bacteria (Radj = -0.38, p = 0.03). 
Subgingival bacterial dysbiosis also associated with reduced levels of gut SCFA 
producing bacteria (Radj = -0.58, p = 0.002). These results suggest that 
periodontal inflammation and subgingival microbiota contribute to gut bacterial 
changes.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12061225
PMCID: PMC11205299
PMID: 38930608

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest are reported for any of 
the investigators. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and 
interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jun 26;14(1):14738. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-65538-8.

Genome-wide association study identifies host genetic variants influencing oral 
microbiota diversity and metabolic health.

Stankevic E(1), Kern T(1), Borisevich D(1), Poulsen CS(1), Madsen AL(1), Hansen 
TH(1)(2), Jonsson A(1), Schubert M(1), Nygaard N(3), Nielsen T(1)(2)(4), 
Belstrøm D(3), Ahluwalia TS(5)(6), Witte DR(7)(8), Grarup N(1), Arumugam M(1), 
Pedersen O(1)(9), Hansen T(10).

Author information:
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Medical Department, Zealand University Hospital, Koege, Denmark.
(3)Department of Odontology, Section for Clinical Oral Microbiology, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(5)Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark.
(6)The Bioinformatics Center, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)Department of Public Health, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(8)Steno Diabetes Center Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Center for Clinical Metabolic Research, Herlev-Gentofte University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(10)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
torben.hansen@sund.ku.dk.

The microbial communities of the oral cavity are important elements of oral and 
systemic health. With emerging evidence highlighting the heritability of oral 
bacterial microbiota, this study aimed to identify host genome variants that 
influence oral microbial traits. Using data from 16S rRNA gene amplicon 
sequencing, we performed genome-wide association studies with univariate and 
multivariate traits of the salivary microbiota from 610 unrelated adults from 
the Danish ADDITION-PRO cohort. We identified six single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in human genomes that showed associations with abundance of 
bacterial taxa at different taxonomical tiers (P < 5 × 10-8). Notably, SNP 
rs17793860 surpassed our study-wide significance threshold (P < 1.19 × 10-9). 
Additionally, rs4530093 was linked to bacterial beta diversity (P < 5 × 10-8). 
Out of these seven SNPs identified, six exerted effects on metabolic traits, 
including glycated hemoglobin A1c, triglyceride and high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol levels, the risk of type 2 diabetes and stroke. Our findings 
highlight the impact of specific host SNPs on the composition and diversity of 
the oral bacterial community. Importantly, our results indicate an intricate 
interplay between host genetics, the oral microbiota, and metabolic health. We 
emphasize the need for integrative approaches considering genetic, microbial, 
and metabolic factors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-65538-8
PMCID: PMC11208528
PMID: 38926497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2024 Jun;27(6):e15218. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.15218.

Combined analysis of metabolomics and 16S rRNA sequencing for ankylosing 
spondylitis patients before and after secukinumab therapy.

Sun C(1)(2)(3), Chao Y(4), Xu H(5), Yang X(1)(2)(3), Pei L(6), Xu G(7), Wang 
F(8), Fan X(1)(2)(3), Tang L(9), Xie C(1)(2)(3), Su Y(5), Wang X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Bengbu Medical University, Bengbu, China.
(2)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Immunology in Chronic Diseases, Bengbu 
Medical University, Bengbu, China.
(3)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Basic and Translational Research of 
Inflammation-Related Diseases, Bengbu, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical 
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences/Peking Union Medical 
College, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's 
Hospital, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical 
University, Bengbu, China.
(7)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of University of 
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China.
(8)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking 
University, Beijing, China.
(9)Biomarker Technologies Corporation, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Alterations in gut microbiota have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of ankylosing spondylitis (AS), but the underlying mechanisms 
remain elusive. This study aims to investigate changes in gut microbiota and 
metabolites in individuals with AS before and after treatment with secukinumab, 
to identify the biological characteristics specific to AS patients and 
investigate the potential biomarkers, for optimizing therapeutic strategies more 
effectively.
METHODS: Fecal microbiome data were collected from 30 AS patients before and 
after secukinumab therapy and compared with data from 40 healthy controls (HC). 
Additionally, we analyzed the metabolic profile of both groups from plasma.
RESULTS: Findings indicated that the treatment-induced changes in the 
composition of several crucial bacterial groups, including Megamonas, 
Prevotella_9, Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Bacteroides, and Agathobacter. 
Post-treatment, these groups exhibited a distribution more akin to that of the 
healthy populations compared with their pretreatment status. We identified three 
gut microbial taxa, namely Prevotellaceae_bacterium_Marseille_P2831, 
Prevotella_buccae, and Elusimicrobiota, as potential biomarkers for diagnosing 
individuals at a higher risk of developing AS and assessing disease outcomes. 
Plasma metabolomics analysis revealed 479 distinct metabolites and highlighted 
three disrupted metabolic pathways. Integration of microbiome and metabolomics 
datasets demonstrated a significant degree of correlation, underscoring the 
impact of the microbiome on metabolic activity.
CONCLUSION: Secukinumab can restore the balance of the gut microbiome and 
metabolites in AS patients, rendering them more similar to those found in the 
healthy population. The analysis of microbiome and metabolomics data have 
unveiled some candidate biomarkers capable of evaluating treatment efficacy.

© 2024 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.15218
PMID: 38923187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. mSphere. 2024 Jul 30;9(7):e0033624. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00336-24. Epub 2024
Jun  26.

Stable flies are bona fide carriers of mastitis-associated bacteria.

Sommer AJ(1)(2), Kettner JE(2), Coon KL(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Hematophagous Stomoxys (stable) fly populations in dairy barns are sustained by 
a constant availability of cattle hosts and manure, which serve as major 
reservoirs of both zoonotic and opportunistic bacterial pathogens. However, the 
composition of the Stomoxys fly microbiota, the mechanisms by which flies 
acquire their microbiome, and the ability of potentially pathogenic bacteria to 
colonize and persist in fly hosts remain to be investigated. Here, we 
longitudinally collected fly and manure samples from two connected dairy 
facilities. High throughput 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing was then used to 
characterize and compare bacterial communities present on or within flies and in 
manure collected from the same facility, while culture-dependent methods were 
used to verify the viability of clinically relevant bacteria. Bacterial alpha 
diversity was overall higher in manure samples as compared to fly samples, with 
manure-associated bacterial communities being dominated by members of the 
Bacteroidales, Eubacteriales, and Oscillospirales. In contrast, flies harbored 
relatively low-complexity communities dominated by members of the 
Enterobacterales, Staphylococcales, and Lactobacillales. Clinically relevant 
bacterial strains, including Escherichia spp. and other taxa associated with 
mastitic cows housed in the same facilities, were detected in paired fly and 
manure samples but exhibited dramatically elevated abundances in fly samples as 
compared to manure samples. Viable colonies of Escherichia, Klebsiella, and 
Staphylococcus spp. were also readily isolated from fly samples, confirming that 
flies harbor culturable mastitis-associated bacteria. This study identifies 
biting flies as bona fide carriers of opportunistically pathogenic bacterial 
taxa on dairy farms.
IMPORTANCE: Disease prevention on dairy farms has significant implications for 
cattle health, food security, and zoonosis. Of particular importance is the 
control of bovine mastitis, which can be caused by diverse bacteria, including 
Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, Streptococcus, and Staphylococcus spp. Despite 
being one of the most significant and costly cattle diseases worldwide, the 
epidemiology of bovine mastitis is not well understood. This study provides 
parallel culture-independent and culture-dependent evidence to support the 
carriage of opportunistically pathogenic bacteria by Stomoxys flies on dairy 
farms. We further show that the fly microbiota is enriched in clinically 
relevant taxa-the vast majority of which can be traced to the manure habitats in 
which flies breed. Altogether, our results identify biting flies as 
underrecognized carriers of bacterial taxa associated with environmental bovine 
mastitis and other opportunistic infections in vertebrates and offer important 
insights into mechanisms of microbial acquisition by these and other medically 
important insects.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00336-24
PMCID: PMC11288000
PMID: 38920390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Parasit Vectors. 2024 Jun 25;17(1):267. doi: 10.1186/s13071-024-06334-1.

Aedes albopictus saliva contains a richer microbial community than the midgut.

Onyango MG(1), Payne AF(2), Stout J(2), Dieme C(2), Kuo L(2), Kramer LD(3), 
Ciota AT(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Texas Tech University, 2901 Main St, 
Lubbock, Texas, 79409-3131, USA. maonyang@ttu.edu.
(2)New York State Department of Health, Wadsworth Center, 5668 State Farm Road, 
Slingerlands, NY, 12159, USA.
(3)School of Public Health, State University of New York Albany, 1400 Washington 
Avenue, Albany, NY, 12222, USA.

BACKGROUND: Past findings demonstrate that arthropods can egest midgut 
microbiota into the host skin leading to dual colonization of the vertebrate 
host with pathogens and saliva microbiome. A knowledge gap exists on how the 
saliva microbiome interacts with the pathogen in the saliva. To fill this gap, 
we need to first define the microbial composition of mosquito saliva.
METHODS: The current study aimed at analyzing and comparing the microbial 
profile of Aedes albopictus saliva and midgut as well as assessing the impact of 
Zika virus (ZIKV) infection on the midgut and saliva microbial composition. 
Colony-reared Ae. albopictus strains were either exposed to ZIKV infectious or 
noninfectious bloodmeal. At 14 ays postinfection, the 16S V3-V4 hypervariable 
rRNA region was amplified from midgut and saliva samples and sequenced on an 
Illumina MiSeq platform. The relative abundance and diversity of midgut and 
saliva microbial taxa were assessed.
RESULTS: We observed a richer microbial community in the saliva compared with 
the midgut, yet some of the microbial taxa were common in the midgut and saliva. 
ZIKV infection did not impact the microbial diversity of midgut or saliva. 
Further, we identified Elizabethkingia spp. in the Ae. albopictus saliva.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides insights into the microbial community of the 
Ae. albopictus saliva as well as the influence of ZIKV infection on the 
microbial composition of its midgut and saliva. The identification of 
Elizabethkingia spp., an emerging pathogen of global health significance, in Ae. 
albopictus saliva is of medical importance. Future studies to assess the 
interactions between Ae. albopictus saliva microbiome and ZIKV could lead to 
novel strategies for developing transmission barrier tools.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-024-06334-1
PMCID: PMC11197185
PMID: 38918848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jun 11;14(1):13386. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-64324-w.

Altered salivary microbiota associated with high-sugar beverage consumption.

Fan X(#)(1), Monson KR(#)(1)(2), Peters BA(1)(3), Whittington JM(2), Um CY(4), 
Oberstein PE(2), McCullough ML(4), Freedman ND(5), Huang WY(5), Ahn J(1)(2), 
Hayes RB(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman 
School of Medicine, 180 Madison, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(2)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, 
USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Population Science, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(5)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(6)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Population Health, NYU Grossman 
School of Medicine, 180 Madison, New York, NY, 10016, USA. 
Richard.B.Hayes@nyulangone.org.
(7)Laura and Isaac Perlmutter Cancer Center, NYU Langone Health, New York, NY, 
USA. Richard.B.Hayes@nyulangone.org.
(#)Contributed equally

The human oral microbiome may alter oral and systemic disease risk. Consuming 
high sugar content beverages (HSB) can lead to caries development by altering 
the microbial composition in dental plaque, but little is known regarding 
HSB-specific oral microbial alterations. Therefore, we conducted a large, 
population-based study to examine associations of HSB intake with oral 
microbiome diversity and composition. Using mouthwash samples of 989 individuals 
in two nationwide U.S. cohorts, bacterial 16S rRNA genes were amplified, 
sequenced, and assigned to bacterial taxa. HSB intake was quantified from food 
frequency questionnaires as low (< 1 serving/week), medium (1-3 servings/week), 
or high (> 3 servings/week). We assessed overall bacterial diversity and 
presence of specific taxa with respect to HSB intake in each cohort separately 
and combined in a meta-analysis. Consistently in the two cohorts, we found lower 
species richness in high HSB consumers (> 3 cans/week) (p = 0.027), and that 
overall bacterial community profiles differed from those of non-consumers 
(PERMANOVA p = 0.040). Specifically, presence of a network of commensal bacteria 
(Lachnospiraceae, Peptostreptococcaceae, and Alloprevotella rava) was less 
common in high compared to non-consumers, as were other species including 
Campylobacter showae, Prevotella oulorum, and Mycoplasma faucium. Presence of 
acidogenic bacteria Bifodobacteriaceae and Lactobacillus rhamnosus was more 
common in high consumers. Abundance of Fusobacteriales and its genus 
Leptotrichia, Lachnoanaerobaculum sp., and Campylobacter were lower with higher 
HSB consumption, and their abundances were correlated. No significant 
interaction was found for these associations with diabetic status or with 
microbial markers for caries (S. mutans) and periodontitis (P. gingivalis). Our 
results suggest that soft drink intake may alter the salivary microbiota, with 
consistent results across two independent cohorts. The observed perturbations of 
overrepresented acidogenic bacteria and underrepresented commensal bacteria in 
high HSB consumers may have implications for oral and systemic disease risk.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-64324-w
PMCID: PMC11167035
PMID: 38862651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: XF: Director, Real-World Evidence, Data Science 
(Jazz Pharmaceuticals). All other authors do not hold any competing interest.

1. Microb Pathog. 2024 Aug;193:106726. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.106726. Epub 
2024 Jun 6.

Emergence of rare and low abundant anaerobic gut Firmicutes is associated with a 
significant downfall of Klebsiella in human colon cancer.

Shastry RP(1), Ghate SD(2), Hameed A(3), Prasad Rao RS(2), Bhandary YP(4), 
Shetty R(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Yenepoya Research Centre, 
Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Deralakatte, Mangaluru, 575018, India. 
Electronic address: rpshastry@yenepoya.edu.in.
(2)Center for Bioinformatics, Nitte (Deemed to be University), Mangaluru, 
575018, India.
(3)Division of Microbiology and Biotechnology, Yenepoya Research Centre, 
Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Deralakatte, Mangaluru, 575018, India.
(4)Division of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, Yenepoya Research Centre, 
Yenepoya (Deemed to be University), Deralakatte, Mangaluru, 575018, India.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, Yenepoya Medical College Hospital, 
Deralakatte, Mangaluru, 575018, India.

Gut bacterial dysbiosis has been linked to several gastrointestinal diseases, 
including deadly colorectal cancer (CRC), a leading cause of mortality in cancer 
patients. However, perturbation in gut bacteriome during colon cancer (CC, 
devoid of colorectal malignancy) remains poorly explored. Here, 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon sequencing was carried out for fecal DNA samples targeted to 
hypervariable V3-V4 region by employing MiSeq platform to explore the gut 
bacterial community shift in CC patients. While alpha diversity indices 
predicted high species richness and diversity, beta diversity showed marked gut 
bacterial compositional dissimilarity in CC versus healthy controls (HC, n = 10 
each). We observed a significant (p < 0.05, Wilcoxon Rank-Sum test) emergence of 
low-abundant anaerobic taxa, including Parvimonas and Peptostreptococcus, in 
addition to Subdoligranulum, Coprococcus, Holdemanella, Solobacterium, 
Bilophila, Blautia, Dorea, Moryella and several unidentified taxa, mainly 
affiliated to Firmicutes, in CC patients. In addition, we also traced the 
emergence of putative probiotic taxon Slackia, belonging to Actinomycetota, in 
CC patients. The emergence of anaerobic Firmicutes in CC is accompanied by a 
significant (p < 0.05) decline in the Klebsiella, as determined through linear 
discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) and heat tree analyses. Shifts in core 
microbiome and variation in network correlation were also witnessed. Taken 
together, this study highlighted a significant and consistent emergence of rare 
anaerobic Firmicutes suggesting possible anaerobiosis driving gut microbial 
community shift, which could be exploited in designing diagnostic and 
therapeutic tools targeted to CC.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.106726
PMID: 38848931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Genome Med. 2024 Jun 5;16(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s13073-024-01344-1.

Colorectal cancer microbiome programs DNA methylation of host cells by affecting 
methyl donor metabolism.

Liu Z(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhang H(1), Yi Z(1), Ma H(1), Wang X(2), Wang J(3), Liu 
Y(1), Zheng Y(4), Fang W(4), Huang P(5), Liu X(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology-Microbiology Division, State Key Laboratory of 
Reproductive Medicine, Key Laboratory of Pathogen of Jiangsu Province, Key 
Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Center of Global 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, China.
(2)Core Facility Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, No. 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(3)The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou 
Municipal Hospital, Gusu School, Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, 215008, 
China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310003, China.
(5)Department of Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 211166, China. huangping@njmu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Pathogen Biology-Microbiology Division, State Key Laboratory of 
Reproductive Medicine, Key Laboratory of Pathogen of Jiangsu Province, Key 
Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Center of Global 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, China. 
xingyinliu@njmu.edu.cn.
(7)The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou 
Municipal Hospital, Gusu School, Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, 215008, 
China. xingyinliu@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from complex interactions between 
host and environment, which include the gut and tissue microbiome. It is 
hypothesized that epigenetic regulation by gut microbiota is a fundamental 
interface by which commensal microbes dynamically influence intestinal biology. 
The aim of this study is to explore the interplay between gut and tissue 
microbiota and host DNA methylation in CRC.
METHODS: Metagenomic sequencing of fecal samples was performed on matched CRC 
patients (n = 18) and healthy controls (n = 18). Additionally, tissue microbiome 
was profiled with 16S rRNA gene sequencing on tumor (n = 24) and tumor-adjacent 
normal (n = 24) tissues of CRC patients, while host DNA methylation was assessed 
through whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) in a subset of 13 individuals.
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed substantial alterations in the DNA methylome of 
CRC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues. An extensive meta-analysis, 
incorporating publicly available and in-house data, identified significant 
shifts in microbial-derived methyl donor-related pathways between tumor and 
adjacent normal tissues. Of note, we observed a pronounced enrichment of 
microbial-associated CpGs within the promoter regions of genes in adjacent 
normal tissues, a phenomenon notably absent in tumor tissues. Furthermore, we 
established consistent and recurring associations between methylation patterns 
of tumor-related genes and specific bacterial taxa.
CONCLUSIONS: This study emphasizes the pivotal role of the gut microbiota and 
pathogenic bacteria in dynamically shaping DNA methylation patterns, impacting 
physiological homeostasis, and contributing to CRC tumorigenesis. These findings 
provide valuable insights into the intricate host-environment interactions in 
CRC development and offer potential avenues for therapeutic interventions in 
this disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-024-01344-1
PMCID: PMC11151592
PMID: 38840170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Environ Microbiol. 2024 Jun;26(6):e16664. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.16664.

Local environment shapes milk microbiomes while evolutionary history constrains 
milk macronutrients in captive cercopithecine primates.

Bornbusch SL(1)(2), Shinnerl HE(2), Gentry L(1), Keady MM(3), Glick V(2)(4), 
Muletz-Wolz CR(1), Power ML(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Conservation Genomics, Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation 
Biology Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Nutrition Science, Smithsonian's National Zoo and Conservation 
Biology Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
(3)Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Department of Immunology and Infectious Disease, Harvard University, Harvard 
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)Center for Species Survival, Smithsonian National Zoo and Conservation 
Biology Institute, Washington, DC, USA.

Milk is a complex biochemical fluid that includes macronutrients and microbiota, 
which, together, are known to facilitate infant growth, mediate the colonization 
of infant microbiomes, and promote immune development. Examining factors that 
shape milk microbiomes and milk-nutrient interplay across host taxa is critical 
to resolving the evolution of the milk environment. Using a comparative approach 
across four cercopithecine primate species housed at three facilities under 
similar management conditions, we test for the respective influences of the 
local environment (housing facility) and host species on milk (a) macronutrients 
(fat, sugar, and protein), (b) microbiomes (16S rRNA), and (c) predicted 
microbial functions. We found that milk macronutrients were structured according 
to host species, while milk microbiomes and predicted function were strongly 
shaped by the local environment and, to a lesser extent, host species. The milk 
microbiomes of rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) at two different facilities more 
closely resembled those of heterospecific facility-mates compared to 
conspecifics at a different facility. We found similar, facility-driven patterns 
of microbial functions linked to physiology and immune modulation, suggesting 
that milk microbiomes may influence infant health and development. These results 
provide novel insight into the complexity of milk and its potential impact on 
infants across species and environments.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons Ltd. This article has been contributed to by U.S. 
Government employees and their work is in the public domain in the USA.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.16664
PMID: 38830671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Probiotics Antimicrob Proteins. 2024 Jun 3. doi: 10.1007/s12602-024-10293-5. 
Online ahead of print.

Reduction in Serum Concentrations of Uremic Toxins Driven by Bifidobacterium 
Longum Subsp. Longum BL21 is Associated with Gut Microbiota Changes in a Rat 
Model of Chronic Kidney Disease.

Dong Y(1)(2), Gai Z(3), Han M(4), Xu J(3), Zou K(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Germline Stem Cells and Microenvironment Lab, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China.
(2)Stem Cell Research and Translation Center, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, 210095, China.
(3)Department of Research and Development, Wecare Probiotics Co., Ltd, Suzhou, 
215200, China.
(4)Department of Food Quality and Safety, Shanghai Business School, Shanghai, 
200235, China.
(5)Germline Stem Cells and Microenvironment Lab, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China. 
Kangzou@njau.edu.cn.
(6)Stem Cell Research and Translation Center, Nanjing Agricultural University, 
Nanjing, 210095, China. Kangzou@njau.edu.cn.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis and consequent impairment of gut barrier function, 
culminating in elevated levels of uremic toxins, are prevalent in chronic kidney 
disease (CKD) patients. These toxins, notably indoxyl sulphate (IS), 
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA), and trimethylamine oxide (TMAO), are implicated in a 
spectrum of CKD-related complications, including cardiovascular disease, bone 
and mineral disorders, and inflammation. The specific impacts of various 
probiotics on these CKD manifestations remain unexplored. This study delved into 
the potential of dietary probiotic interventions, particularly Bifidobacterium 
longum subsp. longum BL21, to modulate gut microbiota and mitigate metabolic 
disorders in a CKD rat model. Over a six-week period, we administered a dietary 
regimen of BL21 and conducted comprehensive analyses, including serum uremic 
toxin quantification and 16S rRNA gene sequencing, to systematically profile gut 
microbial alterations at the phylogenetic level. Our findings reveal that BL21 
intervention significantly ameliorated CKD-induced disruptions in gut microbial 
populations, enhancing both microbial richness and the relative abundance of key 
taxa. Importantly, BL21 appeared to exert its beneficial effects by modulating 
the abundance of crucial species such as Barnesiella and Helicobacter. 
Functionally, the intervention markedly normalized serum levels of IS, IAA, and 
TMAO, while potentially attenuating p-cresol sulphate (PCS) and p-cresol 
glucuronide (PCG) concentrations. Consequently, BL21 demonstrated efficacy in 
regulating gut microbiota and curtailing the accumulation of uremic toxins. Our 
results advocate for the utilization of BL21 as a dietary intervention to 
diminish serum uremic toxins and re-establish gut microbiota equilibrium at the 
phylogenetic level, underscoring the promise of probiotic strategies in the 
management of CKD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12602-024-10293-5
PMID: 38829564

1. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2024 May 30;23(1):49. doi: 
10.1186/s12941-024-00710-6.

Chronic endometritis and the endometrial microbiota: implications for 
reproductive success in patients with recurrent implantation failure.

Zhang H(1), Zou H(1), Zhang C(1)(2), Zhang S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Reproductive Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
400010, China.
(2)Joint International Research Lab for Reproduction and Development of Ministry 
of Education of China, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400010, China.
(3)The Center for Reproductive Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
400010, China. shenzhang@cqmu.edu.cn.
(4)Joint International Research Lab for Reproduction and Development of Ministry 
of Education of China, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400010, China. 
shenzhang@cqmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Chronic endometritis (CE) is associated with poor reproductive 
outcomes, yet the role of endometrial microbiota in patients with recurrent 
implantation failure (RIF) and CE remains unclear. This study aims to 
characterize endometrial microbiota in RIF patients with CE and assess its 
implications for reproductive outcomes.
METHODS: In this prospective study, we enrolled RIF patients both with and 
without CE. Endometrial and cervical samples were collected for 16 S rRNA gene 
sequencing. Microbiota composition was compared between groups using diversity 
indices, phylum, and genus-level analysis. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) 
and Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to assess relationships 
between CE, reproductive outcomes, and microbiota. Predictive functional 
profiling was performed to evaluate metabolic pathways associated with CE.
RESULTS: Endometrial microbiota in CE patients exhibited greater diversity and 
evenness compared to non-CE patients. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) 
revealed distinct clustering between CE and non-CE groups. Linear discriminant 
analysis (LDA) identified Proteobacteria, Aminicenantales, and Chloroflexaceae 
as characteristic of CE, while Lactobacillus, Acinetobacter, Herbaspirillum, 
Ralstonia, Shewanela, and Micrococcaceae were associated with non-CE. CCA 
demonstrated associations between CE, adverse reproductive outcomes, and 
specific bacterial taxa. Microbial metabolic pathways significantly differed 
between CE and non-CE groups, with enrichment in pathways related to cofactors, 
vitamins, secondary metabolites, and the immune system in CE patients.
CONCLUSION: RIF patients with CE exhibit distinct endometrial microbiota 
compositions associated with adverse reproductive outcomes. The increased 
microbial diversity and altered metabolic pathways in CE suggest a potential 
correlation with reproductive outcomes, although further studies are necessary 
to elucidate the causal relationship between microbiota alterations and 
fertility. Modulating the endometrial microbiome may represent a novel 
therapeutic strategy to improve IVF outcomes in patients with CE.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12941-024-00710-6
PMCID: PMC11140900
PMID: 38816832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Water Res. 2024 Aug 1;259:121818. doi: 10.1016/j.watres.2024.121818. Epub 2024
 May 23.

Urban stormwater green infrastructure: Evaluating the public health service role 
of bioretention using microbial source tracking and bacterial community 
analyses.

Lancaster E(1), Winston R(2), Martin J(3), Lee J(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, USA; Environmental Sciences Graduate Program, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Environmental Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA; Department of Food, Agricultural, and Biological Engineering, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Civil, Environmental, and 
Geodetic Engineering, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(3)Department of Food, Agricultural, and Biological Engineering, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA; Sustainability Institute, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(4)Division of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, OH, USA; Environmental Sciences Graduate Program, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Food Science & 
Technology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA; Infectious Diseases 
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address: 
lee.4598@osu.edu.

Bioretention cells (BRCs) control stormwater flow on-site during precipitation, 
reducing runoff and improving water quality through chemical, physical, and 
biological processes. While BRCs are effective in these aspects, they provide 
habitats for wildlife and may face microbial hazards from fecal shedding, posing 
a potential threat to human health and the nearby environment. However, limited 
knowledge exists regarding the ability to control microbial hazards (e.g., 
beyond using typical indicator bacteria) through stormwater biofiltration. 
Therefore, the purpose of this study is to characterize changes in the bacterial 
community of urban stormwater undergoing bioretention treatment, with the goal 
of assessing the public health implications of these green infrastructure 
solutions. Samples from BRC inflow and outflow in Columbus, Ohio, were collected 
post-heavy storms from October 2021 to March 2022. Conventional culture-based E. 
coli monitoring and microbial source tracking (MST) were conducted to identify 
major fecal contamination extent and its sources (i.e., human, canine, avian, 
and ruminant). Droplet digital polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR) was utilized to 
quantify the level of host-associated fecal contamination in addition to three 
antibiotic resistant genes (ARGs): tetracycline resistance gene (tetQ), 
sulfonamide resistance gene (sul1), and Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase 
resistance gene (blaKPC). Subsequently, 16S rRNA gene sequencing was conducted 
to characterize bacterial community differences between stormwater BRC inflow 
and outflow. Untreated urban stormwater reflects anthropogenic contamination, 
suggesting it as a potential source of contamination to waterbodies and urban 
environments. When comparing inlet and outlet BRC samples, urban stormwater 
treated via biofiltration did not increase microbial hazards, and changes in 
bacterial taxa and alpha diversity were negligible. Beta diversity results 
reveal a significant shift in bacterial community structure, while 
simultaneously enhancing the water quality (i.e., reduction of metals, total 
suspended solids, total nitrogen) of urban stormwater. Significant correlations 
were found between the bacterial community diversity of urban stormwater with 
fecal contamination (e.g. dog) and ARG (sul1), rainfall intensity, and water 
quality (hardness, total phosphorous). The study concludes that bioretention 
technology can sustainably maintain urban microbial water quality without posing 
additional public health risks, making it a viable green infrastructure solution 
for heavy rainfall events exacerbated by climate change.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.watres.2024.121818
PMID: 38815337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. J Oral Microbiol. 2024 May 27;16(1):2359887. doi:
10.1080/20002297.2024.2359887.  eCollection 2024.

Salivary microbiome is associated with the response to chemoradiotherapy in 
initially inoperable patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

He Y(1), Li XY(1), Hu AQ(1), Qian D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, 
Division of Life Sciences and Medicine, University of Science and Technology of 
China, Hefei, China.

BACKGROUND: The salivary microbiome may interact with chemoradiotherapy through 
dynamic changes in microbial composition and systemic immunity. We aimed to 
explore the association between the salivary microbiome and response to 
chemoradiotherapy in initially inoperable patients with local advanced 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (LAESCC).
METHODS: Salivary and peripheral blood samples were collected before and after 
chemoradiotherapy. The microbiome and metabolic pathways were analyzed by 16S 
ribosomal RNA sequencing and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry/Mass 
spectrometry analyses.
RESULTS: The salivary microbiome exhibited characteristic variations between 
patients and healthy controls. A significant correlation was found between 
Prevotella_salivae, Saccharibacteria_TM7_G3_bacterium_HMT_351, and 
Veillonellaceae_G1_bacterium_HMT_129 and pathological complete response (pCR) in 
initially inoperable patients who underwent surgery. The PICRUSt suggested that 
immune diseases and cell motility were different in tumor compared to normal 
groups. KEGG enrichment analysis showed enriched lipid metabolism, signal 
transduction, and membrane transport in the tumor group. CD3+CD8 T cells, IL6, 
IL10, and IFNγ exhibited an increasing trend during the treatment process of 
chemoradiotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that variations in specific saliva taxa 
associated with host immunomodulatory cells and cytokines could be promising for 
early efficacy prediction of chemoradiotherapy in initially inoperable patients 
with LAESCC.

© 2024 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & 
Francis Group.

DOI: 10.1080/20002297.2024.2359887
PMCID: PMC11134033
PMID: 38813524

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. Animals (Basel). 2024 May 17;14(10):1498. doi: 10.3390/ani14101498.

Effects of Hibernation on Colonic Epithelial Tissue and Gut Microbiota in Wild 
Chipmunks (Tamias sibiricus).

Liu J(1)(2), Jiang G(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Zhang H(1), Jia X(1), Gan Z(2), Yu 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Basic Medical Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Jilin University, Changchun 130021, China.

The gut microbiota plays a crucial role in the host's metabolic processes. Many 
studies have shown significant changes in the gut microbiota of mammals during 
hibernation to adapt to the changes in the external environment, but there is 
limited research on the colonic epithelial tissue and gut microbiota of the wild 
chipmunks during hibernation. This study analyzed the diversity, composition, 
and function of the gut microbiota of the wild chipmunk during hibernation using 
16S rRNA gene high-throughput sequencing technology, and further conducted 
histological analysis of the colon. Histological analysis of the colon showed an 
increase in goblet cells in the hibernation group, which was an adaptive change 
to long-term fasting during hibernation. The dominant gut microbial phyla were 
Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria, and the relative abundance of 
them changed significantly. The analysis of gut microbiota structural 
differences indicated that the relative abundance of Helicobacter typhlonius and 
Mucispirillum schaedleri increased significantly, while unclassified 
Prevotella-9, unclassified Prevotellaceae-UCG-001, unclassified 
Prevotellaceae-UCG-003 and other species of Prevotella decreased significantly 
at the species level. Alpha diversity analysis showed that hibernation increased 
the diversity and richness of the gut microbiota. Beta diversity analysis 
revealed significant differences in gut microbiota diversity between the 
hibernation group and the control group. PICRUSt2 functional prediction analysis 
of the gut microbiota showed that 15 pathways, such as lipid metabolism, 
xenobiotics biodegradation and metabolism, amino acid metabolism, environmental 
adaptation, and neurodegenerative diseases, were significantly enriched in the 
hibernation group, while 12 pathways, including carbohydrate metabolism, 
replication and repair, translation, and transcription, were significantly 
enriched in the control group. It can be seen that during hibernation, the gut 
microbiota of the wild chipmunk changes towards taxa that are beneficial for 
reducing carbohydrate consumption, increasing fat consumption, and adapting more 
strongly to environmental changes in order to better provide energy for the body 
and ensure normal life activities during hibernation.

DOI: 10.3390/ani14101498
PMCID: PMC11117362
PMID: 38791715

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Biomedicines. 2024 May 1;12(5):996. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12050996.

Microbial Signatures in COVID-19: Distinguishing Mild and Severe Disease via Gut 
Microbiota.

Galeeva JS(1), Fedorov DE(1), Starikova EV(1), Manolov AI(1), Pavlenko AV(1), 
Selezneva OV(2), Klimina KM(2), Veselovsky VA(2), Morozov MD(2), Yanushevich 
OO(3), Krikheli NI(3), Levchenko OV(3), Andreev DN(3), Sokolov FS(3), Fomenko 
AK(3), Devkota MK(3), Andreev NG(3), Zaborovskiy AV(3), Bely PA(3), 
Tsaregorodtsev SV(3), Evdokimov VV(3), Maev IV(3), Govorun VM(3), Ilina EN(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Department of 
Mathematical Biology and Bioinformatics, Moscow 117246, Russia.
(2)Lopukhin Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine 
of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow 119435, Russia.
(3)Department of Clinical Dentistry, Moscow State University of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Moscow 127473, Russia.

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, has significantly 
impacted global healthcare, underscoring the importance of exploring the virus's 
effects on infected individuals beyond treatments and vaccines. Notably, recent 
findings suggest that SARS-CoV-2 can infect the gut, thereby altering the gut 
microbiota. This study aimed to analyze the gut microbiota composition 
differences between COVID-19 patients experiencing mild and severe symptoms. We 
conducted 16S rRNA metagenomic sequencing on fecal samples from 49 mild and 43 
severe COVID-19 cases upon hospital admission. Our analysis identified a 
differential abundance of specific bacterial species associated with the 
severity of the disease. Severely affected patients showed an association with 
Enterococcus faecium, Akkermansia muciniphila, and others, while milder cases 
were linked to Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Alistipes putredinis, Blautia 
faecis, and additional species. Furthermore, a network analysis using SPIEC-EASI 
indicated keystone taxa and highlighted structural differences in bacterial 
connectivity, with a notable disruption in the severe group. Our study 
highlights the diverse impacts of SARS-CoV-2 on the gut microbiome among both 
mild and severe COVID-19 patients, showcasing a spectrum of microbial responses 
to the virus. Importantly, these findings align, to some extent, with 
observations from other studies on COVID-19 gut microbiomes, despite variations 
in methodologies. The findings from this study, based on retrospective data, 
establish a foundation for future prospective research to confirm the role of 
the gut microbiome as a predictive biomarker for the severity of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12050996
PMCID: PMC11118803
PMID: 38790958

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2024 Jul;47(4):126516. doi: 10.1016/j.syapm.2024.126516. 
Epub 2024 May 12.

Schauerella fraxinea gen. nov., sp. nov., a bacterial species that colonises ash 
trees tolerant to dieback caused by Hymenoscyphus fraxineus.

Behrendt U(1), Burghard V(2), Wende S(3), Ulrich K(4), Wolf J(5), Neumann-Schaal 
M(6), Ulrich A(7).

Author information:
(1)Leibniz Center for Agricultural Landscape Research (ZALF), Microbial 
Biogeochemistry, Eberswalder Str. 84, D-15374 Müncheberg, Germany. Electronic 
address: ubehrendt@zalf.de.
(2)Leibniz Center for Agricultural Landscape Research (ZALF), Microbial 
Biogeochemistry, Eberswalder Str. 84, D-15374 Müncheberg, Germany. Electronic 
address: Valentin.Burghard@zalf.de.
(3)Leibniz Center for Agricultural Landscape Research (ZALF), Microbial 
Biogeochemistry, Eberswalder Str. 84, D-15374 Müncheberg, Germany. Electronic 
address: Sonja.Wende@zalf.de.
(4)Johann Heinrich Von Thünen Institute, Institute of Forest Genetics, 
Eberswalder Chaussee 3a, 15377 Waldsieversdorf, Germany. Electronic address: 
k.ulrich@thuenen.de.
(5)Research Group Bacterial Metabolomics, Leibniz Institute DSMZ - German 
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany. 
Electronic address: jacqueline.wolf@dsmz.de.
(6)Research Group Bacterial Metabolomics, Leibniz Institute DSMZ - German 
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures GmbH, Braunschweig, Germany. 
Electronic address: meina.neumann-schaal@dsmz.de.
(7)Leibniz Center for Agricultural Landscape Research (ZALF), Microbial 
Biogeochemistry, Eberswalder Str. 84, D-15374 Müncheberg, Germany. Electronic 
address: aulrich@zalf.de.

The tolerance of ash trees against the pathogen Hymenoscyphus fraxineus seems to 
be associated with the occurrence of specific microbial taxa on leaves. A group 
of bacterial isolates, primarily identified on tolerant trees, was investigated 
with regard to their taxonomic classification and their potential to suppress 
the ash dieback pathogen. Examination of OGRI values revealed a separate species 
position. A phylogenomic analysis, based on orthologous and marker genes, 
indicated a separate genus position along with the species Achromobacter 
aestuarii. Furthermore, analysis of the ratio of average nucleotide identities 
and genome alignment fractions demonstrated genomic dissimilarities typically 
observed for inter-genera comparisons within this family. As a result of these 
investigations, the strains are considered to represent a separate species 
within a new genus, for which the name Schauerella fraxinea gen. nov., sp. nov. 
is proposed, with the type strain B3P038T (=LMG 33092 T = DSM 115926 T). 
Additionally, a reclassification of the species Achromobacter aestuarii as 
Schauerella aestuarii comb. nov. is proposed. In a co-cultivation assay, the 
strains were able to inhibit the growth of a H. fraxineus strain. Accordingly, a 
functional analysis of the genome of S. fraxinea B3P038T revealed genes 
mediating the production of antifungal substances. This potential, combined with 
the prevalent presence in the phyllosphere of tolerant ash trees, makes this 
group interesting for an inoculation experiment with the aim of controlling the 
pathogen in an integrative approach. For future field trials, a strain-specific 
qPCR system was developed to establish an efficient method for monitoring the 
inoculation success.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2024.126516
PMID: 38772267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Endocrine. 2024 Sep;85(3):1178-1192. doi: 10.1007/s12020-024-03828-x. Epub
2024  May 18.

Metformin-induced changes of the gut microbiota in patients with type 2 diabetes 
mellitus: results from a prospective cohort study.

Gao Y(1), Zhao T(2), Lv N(3), Liu S(4), Yuan T(1), Fu Y(1), Zhao W(#)(5), Zhu 
B(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National Health Commission, Department of 
Endocrinology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Physical Examination Center, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(3)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National Health Commission, Department of 
Endocrinology, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Peking 
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China. xiehezhaoweigang@163.com.
(6)Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 
zhubaoli@im.ac.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The influence of the microbiota on hypoglycemic agents is becoming 
more apparent. The effects of metformin, a primary anti-diabetes drug, on gut 
microbiota are still not fully understood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This prospective cohort study aims to investigate 
the longitudinal effects of metformin on the gut microbiota of 25 
treatment-naïve diabetes patients, each receiving a daily dose of 1500 mg. 
Microbiota compositions were analyzed at baseline, and at 1, 3, and 6 months of 
medication using 16S rRNA gene sequencing.
RESULTS: Prior to the 3-month period of metformin treatment, significant 
improvements were noted in body mass index (BMI) and glycemic-related 
parameters, such as fasting blood glucose (FPG) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), 
alongside homeostasis model assessment indices of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). 
At the 3-month mark of medication, a significant reduction in the α-diversity of 
the gut microbiota was noted, while β-diversity exhibited no marked variances 
throughout the treatment duration. The Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio. 
markedly decreased. Metformin treatment consistently increased 
Escherichia-Shigella and decreased Romboutsia, while Pseudomonas decreased at 3 
months. Fuzzy c-means clustering identified three longitudinal trajectory 
clusters for microbial fluctuations: (i) genera temporarily changing, (ii) 
genera continuing to decrease (Bacteroides), and (iii) genera continuing to 
increase(Lachnospiraceae ND3007 group, [Eubacterium] xylanophilum group, 
Romboutsia, Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcaceae UCG-014). The correlation 
matrix revealed associations between specific fecal taxa and metformin-related 
clinical parameters HbA1c, FPG, Uric Acid (UA), high-density 
lipoproteincholesterol (HDL-C), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), hypersensitive 
C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), triglyceride (TG) (P < 0.05). Metacyc database 
showed that metformin significantly altered 17 functional pathways. Amino acid 
metabolism pathways such as isoleucine biosynthesis predominated in the 
post-treatment group.
CONCLUSIONS: Metformin's role in glucose metabolism regulation may primarily 
involve specific alterations in certain gut microbial species rather than an 
overall increase in microbial species diversity. This may suggest gut microbiota 
targets in future studies on metabolic abnormalities caused by metformin.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-024-03828-x
PMID: 38761345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 May 18;24(1):172. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03308-2.

Comparison of the sputum microbiome between patients with stable nontuberculous 
mycobacterial pulmonary disease and patients requiring treatment.

Song MJ(#)(1), Kim DH(#)(1), Kim SY(1), Kang N(2), Jhun BW(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-Ro, 
Gangnam-Gu, Seoul, 06351, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Allergy, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, 
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. 
varsagod0314@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 81 Irwon-Ro, 
Gangnam-Gu, Seoul, 06351, Republic of Korea. byungwoo.jhun@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: We evaluated whether the sputum bacterial microbiome differs between 
nontuberculous mycobacteria pulmonary disease (NTM-PD) patients with stable 
disease not requiring antibiotic treatment and those requiring antibiotics.
METHODS: We collected sputum samples from 21 clinically stable NTM-PD patients 
(stable group) and 14 NTM-PD patients needing antibiotic treatment (treatment 
group). We also obtained 13 follow-up samples from the stable group. We analyzed 
the 48 samples using 16S rRNA gene sequencing (V3-V4 region) and compared the 
groups.
RESULTS: In the linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis, the 
species Porphyromonas pasteri, Haemophilus parahaemolyticus, Prevotella 
nanceiensis, and Gemella haemolysans were significantly more prevalent in the 
sputum of the stable group compared to the treatment group. No taxa showed 
significant differences in alpha-/beta-diversity or LEfSe between the 21 
baseline and 13 follow-up sputum samples in the stable group. In the stable 
group, the genus Bergeyella and species Prevotella oris were less common in 
patients who achieved spontaneous culture conversion (n = 9) compared to those 
with persistent NTM positivity (n = 12) (effect size 3.04, p = 0.039 for 
Bergeyella; effect size 3.64, p = 0.033 for P. oris). In the treatment group, H. 
parainfluenzae was more common in patients with treatment success (n = 7) than 
in treatment-refractory patients (n = 7) (effect size 4.74, p = 0.013).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified distinct bacterial taxa in the sputum of 
NTM-PD patients based on disease status. These results suggest the presence of a 
microbial environment that helps maintain disease stability.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03308-2
PMCID: PMC11102115
PMID: 38760693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2024 Jun 18;90(6):e0061924. doi: 10.1128/aem.00619-24.
 Epub 2024 May 17.

Priority effects alter microbiome composition and increase abundance of 
probiotic taxa in treefrog tadpoles.

Jones KR(1), Belden LK(#)(1), Hughey MC(#)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia, USA.
(2)Department of Biology, Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Host-associated microbial communities, like other ecological communities, may be 
impacted by the colonization order of taxa through priority effects. Developing 
embryos and their associated microbiomes are subject to stochasticity during 
colonization by bacteria. For amphibian embryos, often developing externally in 
bacteria-rich environments, this stochasticity may be particularly impactful. 
For example, the amphibian microbiome can mitigate lethal outcomes from disease 
for their hosts; however, this may depend on microbiome composition. Here, we 
examined the assembly of the bacterial community in spring peeper (Pseudacris 
crucifer) embryos and tadpoles. First, we reared embryos from identified mating 
pairs in either lab or field environments to examine the relative impact of 
environment and parentage on embryo and tadpole bacterial communities. Second, 
we experimentally inoculated embryos to determine if priority effects (i) could 
be used to increase the relative abundance of Janthinobacterium lividum, an 
amphibian-associated bacteria capable of preventing fungal infection, and (ii) 
would lead to observed differences in the relative abundances of two closely 
related bacteria from the genus Pseudomonas. Using 16S rRNA gene amplicon 
sequencing, we observed differences in community composition based on rearing 
location and parentage in embryos and tadpoles. In the inoculation experiment, 
we found that priority inoculation could increase the relative abundance of J. 
lividum, but did not find that either Pseudomonas isolate was able to prevent 
colonization by the other when given priority. These results highlight the 
importance of environmental source pools and parentage in determining microbiome 
composition, while also providing novel methods for the administration of a 
known amphibian probiotic.
IMPORTANCE: Harnessing the functions of host-associated bacteria is a promising 
mechanism for managing disease outcomes across different host species. In the 
case of amphibians, certain frog-associated bacteria can mitigate lethal 
outcomes of infection by the fungal pathogen Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. 
Successful probiotic applications require knowledge of community assembly and an 
understanding of the ecological mechanisms that structure these symbiotic 
bacterial communities. In our study, we show the importance of environment and 
parentage in determining bacterial community composition and that community 
composition can be influenced by priority effects. Further, we provide support 
for the use of bacterial priority effects as a mechanism to increase the 
relative abundance of target probiotic taxa in a developing host. While our 
results show that priority effects are not universally effective across all 
host-associated bacteria, our ability to increase the relative abundance of 
specific probiotic taxa may enhance conservation strategies that rely on captive 
rearing of endangered vertebrates.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.00619-24
PMCID: PMC11218634
PMID: 38757977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. mSystems. 2024 Jun 18;9(6):e0133923. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01339-23. Epub 2024
 May 16.

Gardnerella diversity and ecology in pregnancy and preterm birth.

Berman HL(1), Goltsman DSA(2)(3), Anderson M(1), Relman DA(2)(3)(4), Callahan 
BJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(4)Infectious Diseases Section, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, 
Palo Alto, California, USA.
(5)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
North Carolina, USA.

The vaginal microbiome has been linked to negative health outcomes including 
preterm birth. Specific taxa, including Gardnerella spp., have been identified 
as risk factors for these conditions. Historically, microbiome analysis methods 
have treated all Gardnerella spp. as one species, but the broad diversity of 
Gardnerella has become more apparent. We explore the diversity of Gardnerella 
clades and genomic species in the vaginal microbiome of pregnant women and their 
associations with microbiome composition and preterm birth. Relative abundance 
of Gardnerella clades and genomic species and other taxa was quantified in 
shotgun metagenomic sequencing data from three distinct cohorts of pregnant 
women. We also assessed the diversity and abundance of Gardnerella variants in 
16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing data from seven previously conducted studies 
in differing populations. Individual microbiomes often contained multiple 
Gardnerella variants, and the number of clades was associated with increased 
microbial load, or the ratio of non-human reads to human reads. Taxon 
co-occurrence patterns were largely consistent across Gardnerella clades and 
among cohorts. Some variants previously described as rare were prevalent in 
other cohorts, highlighting the importance of surveying a diverse set of 
populations to fully capture the diversity of Gardnerella. The diversity of 
Gardnerella both across populations and within individual vaginal microbiomes 
has long been unappreciated, as has been the intra-species diversity of many 
other members of the vaginal microbiome. The broad genomic diversity of 
Gardnerella has led to its reclassification as multiple species; here we 
demonstrate the diversity of Gardnerella found within and between vaginal 
microbiomes.IMPORTANCEThe present study shows that single microbiomes can 
contain all currently known species of Gardnerella and that multiple similar 
species can exist within the same environment. Furthermore, surveys of 
demographically distinct populations suggest that some species appear more 
commonly in certain populations. Further studies in broad and diverse 
populations will be necessary to fully understand the ecological roles of each 
Gardnerella sp., how they can co-exist, and their distinct impacts on microbial 
communities, preterm birth, and other health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01339-23
PMCID: PMC11338264
PMID: 38752784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. J Clin Periodontol. 2024 Aug;51(8):1081-1092. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.13998. Epub
2024  May 14.

Oral microbiota of patients with phenylketonuria: A nation-based cross-sectional 
study.

Bingöl M(1), Cardilli A(2)(3), Bingöl AC(4), Löber U(2)(3)(4)(5), Bang C(6), 
Franke A(6), Bartzela T(7), Beblo S(8), Mönch E(9), Stolz S(10), Schaefer AS(1), 
Forslund SK(2)(3)(4)(5)(11), Richter GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology, Oral Medicine and Oral Surgery, Institute for 
Dental and Craniofacial Sciences, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, 
and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association, 
Berlin, Germany.
(3)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, a Cooperation of Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin and Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität 
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, 
Germany.
(5)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Berlin, Germany.
(6)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(7)Department of Orthodontics, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(8)Department of Women and Child Health, Hospital for Children and Adolescents, 
Centre for Pediatric Research Leipzig, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(9)Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Interdisciplinary Metabolism Centre, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin, 
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany.
(10)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Carl-Thiem-Klinikum 
Cottbus, Cottbus, Germany.
(11)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural and Computational Biology 
Unit, Heidelberg, Germany.

AIM: The oral microenvironment contributes to microbial composition and immune 
equilibrium. It is considered to be influenced by dietary habits. 
Phenylketonuria (PKU) patients, who follow a lifelong low-protein diet, exhibit 
higher prevalence of oral diseases such as periodontitis, offering a suitable 
model to explore the interplay between diet, oral microbiota and oral health.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted 16S rDNA sequencing on saliva and 
subgingival plaque from 109 PKU patients (ages 6-68 years) and 114 age-matched 
controls and correlated oral microbial composition and dental health.
RESULTS: PKU patients exhibited worse dental health, reduced oral microbial 
diversity and a difference in the abundance of specific taxa, especially 
Actinobacteriota species, compared to controls. PKU patients with poor 
periodontal health exhibited higher alpha diversity than the orally healthy 
ones, marked by high abundance of the genus Tannerella. Notably, the observed 
taxonomic differences in PKU patients with normal indices of 
decayed/missing/filled teeth, plaque control record, gingival bleeding index and 
periodontal screening and recording index generally differed from microbial 
signatures of periodontitis.
CONCLUSIONS: PKU patients' reduced microbial diversity may be due to their 
diet's metabolic challenges disrupting microbial and immune balance, thus 
increasing oral inflammation. Higher alpha diversity in PKU patients with oral 
inflammation is likely related to expanded microbial niches.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Clinical Periodontology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jcpe.13998
PMID: 38745393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. PLoS One. 2024 May 14;19(5):e0300672. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0300672. 
eCollection 2024.

Age and sex-related variations in murine laryngeal microbiota.

An R(1), Venkatraman A(1), Binns J(1), Saric C(2), Rey FE(3), Thibeault SL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States of America.
(2)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States of America.
(3)Department of Bacteriology, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, 
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, United States of America.

The larynx undergoes significant age and sex-related changes in structure and 
function across the lifespan. Emerging evidence suggests that laryngeal 
microbiota influences immunological processes. Thus, there is a critical need to 
delineate microbial mechanisms that may underlie laryngeal physiological and 
immunological changes. As a first step, the present study explored potential age 
and sex-related changes in the laryngeal microbiota across the lifespan in a 
murine model. We compared laryngeal microbial profiles of mice across the 
lifespan (adolescents, young adults, older adults and elderly) to determine age 
and sex-related microbial variation on 16s rRNA gene sequencing. Measures of 
alpha diversity and beta diversity were obtained, along with differentially 
abundant taxa across age groups and biological sexes. There was relative 
stability of the laryngeal microbiota within each age group and no significant 
bacterial compositional shift in the laryngeal microbiome across the lifespan. 
There was an abundance of short-chain fatty acid producing bacteria in the 
adolescent group, unique to the laryngeal microbiota; taxonomic changes in the 
elderly resembled that of the aged gut microbiome. There were no significant 
changes in the laryngeal microbiota relating to biological sex. This is the 
first study to report age and sex-related variation in laryngeal microbiota. 
This data lays the groundwork for defining how age-related microbial mechanisms 
may govern laryngeal health and disease. Bacterial compositional changes, as a 
result of environmental or systemic stimuli, may not only be indicative of 
laryngeal-specific metabolic and immunoregulatory processes, but may precede 
structural and functional age-related changes in laryngeal physiology.

Copyright: © 2024 An et al. This is an open access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author 
and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0300672
PMCID: PMC11093383
PMID: 38743725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. J Infect Dis. 2024 May 8:jiae247. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiae247. Online ahead of
 print.

Clinical and Microbial Determinants of Upper Respiratory Colonization with 
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Native Microbiota in People with HIV-1 and Control 
Adults.

Nicholson LK(1)(2)(3), Kofonow JM(1)(2), Robertson CE(1)(2), Wright T(4), Li 
Q(2), Gardner EM(2)(4), Frank DN(1)(2), Janoff EN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Mucosal and Vaccine Research Program Colorado (MAVRC), USA.
(2)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Denver VA Medical Center, Denver, CO, USA.
(4)Denver Health and Hospital Authority, Denver, CO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The substantial risk for respiratory and invasive infections with 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn) among people with HIV-1 (PWH) begins with 
asymptomatic colonization. The frequency of Spn colonization among U.S. adults 
with and without HIV-1 infection is not well-characterized in the conjugate 
vaccine era.
METHODS: We determined Spn colonization frequency by culture and specific lytA 
gene QPCR and microbiota profile by 16S rRNA gene sequencing in nasopharyngeal 
(NP) and oropharyngeal (OP) DNA from 138 PWH and 93 control adults and 
associated clinical characteristics.
RESULTS: The frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls did not 
differ (11.6% vs 8.6%, respectively; p=0.46) using combined results of culture 
and PCR, independent of vaccination or behavioral risks. PWH showed altered 
microbiota composition (i.e., beta-diversity. NP: p=0.0028, OP: p=0.0098), 
decreased alpha-diversity (NP: p=0.024, OP: p=0.0045), and differences in the 
relative abundance of multiple bacterial taxa. Spn colonization was associated 
with altered beta-diversity in the NP (p=0.011), but not OP (p=0.21).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite widespread conjugate vaccine and antiretroviral use, 
frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls are currently consistent 
with those reported in the pre-conjugate era. The persistently increased risk of 
pneumococcal disease despite ART may relate to behavioral and immunologic 
variables other than colonization.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For commercial 
re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiae247
PMID: 38718217

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Apr 27:2024.04.26.24306431. doi: 
10.1101/2024.04.26.24306431.

Bad company? The pericardium microbiome in people investigated for tuberculosis 
pericarditis in an HIV-prevalent setting.

Nyawo G, Naidoo C, Wu BG, Kwok B, Clemente JC, Li Y, Minnies S, Reeve B, Moodley 
S, John TJ, Karamchand S, Singh S, Pecararo A, Doubell A, Kyriakakis C, Warren 
R, Segal LN, Theron G.

Update in
    Microbes Infect. 2024 Nov 9:105434. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105434.

BACKGROUND: The microbiome likely plays a role in tuberculosis (TB) 
pathogenesis. We evaluated the site-of-disease microbiome and predicted 
metagenome in people with presumptive tuberculous pericarditis, a major cause of 
mortality, and explored for the first time, the interaction between its 
association with C-reactive protein (CRP), a potential diagnostic biomarker and 
the site-of-disease microbiome in extrapulmonary TB.
METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) 
provided background sampling controls and pericardial fluid (PF) for 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing analysed using QIIME2 and PICRUSt2. Blood was collected to 
measure CRP.
RESULTS: PF from people with definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and 
non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous pericarditis differed in β-diversity. dTBs were, 
vs. nTBs, Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria- enriched. Within dTBs, 
HIV-positives were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium- , Methylobacterium- , and 
Leptothrix -enriched vs. HIV-negatives and HIV-positive dTBs on ART were 
Mycobacterium - and Bifidobacterium -depleted vs. those not on ART. Compared to 
nTBs, dTBs exhibited short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and mycobacterial metabolism 
microbial pathway enrichment. People with additional non-pericardial involvement 
had differentially PF taxa (e.g., Mycobacterium -enrichment and Streptococcus 
-depletion associated with pulmonary infiltrates). Mycobacterium reads were in 
34% (31/91), 8% (2/25) and 17% (4/23) of dTBs, pTBs, and nTBs, respectively. 
β-diversity differed between patients with CRP above vs. below the median value 
( Pseudomonas -depleted). There was no correlation between enriched taxa in dTBs 
and CRP.
CONCLUSIONS: PF is compositionally distinct based on TB status, HIV (and ART) 
status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The clinical significance 
of these findings, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires 
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.04.26.24306431
PMCID: PMC11071582
PMID: 38712063