1. Retrovirology. 2024 Nov 29;21(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s12977-024-00655-w.

Exploring potential associations between the human microbiota and reservoir of 
latent HIV.

Marín-Sánchez N(1)(2), Paredes R(3)(4)(5), Borgognone A(6).

Author information:
(1)IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Catalonia, Spain. rparedes@irsicaixa.es.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, 
Catalonia, Spain. rparedes@irsicaixa.es.
(5)Department of Pathology, Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. 
rparedes@irsicaixa.es.
(6)IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Catalonia, Spain. aborgognone@irsicaixa.es.

BACKGROUND: The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs 
is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy 
supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of 
HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, 
particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 
reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying 
the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral 
reservoir remain poorly understood.
RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human 
microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the 
gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa 
associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. 
Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with 
specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. 
Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory 
signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by 
which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host 
immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on 
potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure 
strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research 
field.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for 
further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between 
the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics 
assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis 
and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an 
effective cure for HIV.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-024-00655-w
PMCID: PMC11605983
PMID: 39614246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Nov 19;25(22):12395. doi: 10.3390/ijms252212395.

Microbiome Shifts and Their Impact on Gut Physiology in Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome.

Aggeletopoulou I(1), Triantos C(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
Hospital of Patras, 26504 Patras, Greece.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is one of the most prevalent functional 
gastrointestinal disorders characterized by recurrent abdominal pain and altered 
bowel habits. The exact pathophysiological mechanisms for IBS development are 
not completely understood. Several factors, including genetic predisposition, 
environmental and psychological influences, low-grade inflammation, alterations 
in gastrointestinal motility, and dietary habits, have been implicated in the 
pathophysiology of the disorder. Additionally, emerging evidence highlights the 
role of gut microbiota in the pathophysiology of IBS. This review aims to 
thoroughly investigate how alterations in the gut microbiota impact 
physiological functions such as the brain-gut axis, immune system activation, 
mucosal inflammation, gut permeability, and intestinal motility. Our research 
focuses on the dynamic "microbiome shifts", emphasizing the enrichment or 
depletion of specific bacterial taxa in IBS and their profound impact on disease 
progression and pathology. The data indicated that specific bacterial 
populations are implicated in IBS, including reductions in beneficial species 
such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium, along with increases in potentially 
harmful bacteria like Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. Emphasis is placed on the 
imperative need for further research to delineate the role of specific 
microbiome alterations and their potential as therapeutic targets, providing new 
insights into personalized treatments for IBS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252212395
PMCID: PMC11594715
PMID: 39596460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Animals (Basel). 2024 Nov 20;14(22):3337. doi: 10.3390/ani14223337.

The Vaginal Microbiome of Mares on the Post-Foaling Day Under Field Conditions.

Płoneczka-Janeczko K(1), Magdziarz M(2), Siemieniuch-Tartanus M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epizootiology with Clinic for Birds and Exotic Animals, Faculty 
of Veterinary Medicine, Wrocław University of Environmental and Life Sciences, 
Plac Grunwaldzki 45, 50-375 Wrocław, Poland.
(2)Hugo Steinhaus Center, Faculty of Pure and Applied Mathematics, Wrocław 
University of Science and Technology, Wyspiańskiego 27, 50-370 Wrocław, Poland.
(3)Department of Large Animals Diseases with the Clinic, Institute of Veterinary 
Medicine, Warsaw University of Life Sciences, Nowoursynowska 100, 02-787 
Warszawa, Poland.

The vaginal bacteria are critical for neonatal immunity, as well as for further 
infections and pathologies in foals and mares during the postpartum period. The 
vaginal microbiota was examined in six mares. Swabs were taken from the vaginal 
caudal wall within 12 h after natural delivery. Next-generation sequencing was 
used to analyze the composition of the vaginal microbiota and identify shared 
bacterial taxa. The post-delivery vaginal microbiome of mares included 18 
identified families, 25 genera, and 33 species. The core families of the mares' 
microbiome comprised Leptotrichiaceae (21.72%), 
Peptostreptococcaceae/Tisserellales (15.54%), Corynebacteriaceae (13.32%), 
Aerococcaceae (10.84%), and Campylobacteraceae (4.26%). Shared bacterial species 
included Corynebacterium kutsheri, Campylobacter spp., Facklamia spp., and 
Oceanivirga uncultured bacteria. We found the presence of various 
Corynebacterium and Streptococcus species that could be involved in uterine 
disorders. Further research should focus on the possible pathogenicity of these 
bacteria for mares in the postpartum period and newborn foals.

DOI: 10.3390/ani14223337
PMCID: PMC11591002
PMID: 39595389

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. PLoS Biol. 2024 Nov 18;22(11):e3002900. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002900. 
eCollection 2024 Nov.

Excess mortality of infected ectotherms induced by warming depends on pathogen 
kingdom and evolutionary history.

Li J(1)(2), Guttmann N(3)(4), Drew GC(1)(5), Hector TE(1), Wolinska J(3)(4), 
King KC(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Department of Evolutionary and Integrative Ecology, Leibniz Institute of 
Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries (IGB), Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy, Institute of Biology, Freie 
Universität Berlin (FU), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Collegium Helveticum, The joint Institute for Advanced Studies (IAS) of the 
ETH Zurich, The University of Zurich, &The Zurich University of the Arts, 
Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Climate change is causing extreme heating events and can lead to more infectious 
disease outbreaks, putting species persistence at risk. The extent to which 
warming temperatures and infection may together impair host health is unclear. 
Using a meta-analysis of >190 effect sizes representing 101 ectothermic animal 
host-pathogen systems, we demonstrate that warming significantly increased the 
mortality of hosts infected by bacterial pathogens. Pathogens that have been 
evolutionarily established within the host species showed higher virulence under 
warmer temperatures. Conversely, the effect of warming on novel infections-from 
pathogens without a shared evolutionary history with the host species-were more 
pronounced with larger differences between compared temperatures. We found that 
compared to established infections, novel infections were more deadly at 
lower/baseline temperatures. Moreover, we revealed that the virulence of fungal 
pathogens increased only when temperatures were shifted upwards towards the 
pathogen thermal optimum. The magnitude of all these significant effects was not 
impacted by host life-stage, immune complexity, pathogen inoculation methods, or 
exposure time. Overall, our findings reveal distinct patterns in changes of 
pathogen virulence during warming. We highlight the importance of pathogen taxa, 
thermal optima, and evolutionary history in determining the impact of global 
change on infection outcomes.

Copyright: © 2024 Li et al. This is an open access article distributed under the 
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author 
and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3002900
PMID: 39556605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. J Headache Pain. 2024 Nov 11;25(1):196. doi: 10.1186/s10194-024-01906-z.

Immune cells mediate the effects of gut microbiota on neuropathic pain: a 
Mendelian randomization study.

Pan H(1), Liu CX(1), Zhu HJ(2), Zhang GF(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, PR China.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Jinan Seventh People's Hospital, Jinan, 250021, 
Shandong, PR China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, Shandong Provincial Hospital Affiliated to 
Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, 250021, Shandong, PR China. 
wfzhgf87@126.com.

BACKGROUND: The gut microbiota may be involved in neuropathic pain. However, the 
causal association between gut microbiota and neuropathic pain remains unclear. 
Whether immune cells and inflammatory factors mediate the pathway from gut 
microbiota to neuropathic pain has not been elucidated.
METHODS: We obtained the summary data of 412 gut microbiota, 731 immune cells, 
91 inflammatory factors, and five types of neuropathic pain (drug-induced 
neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, sciatica, trigeminal neuralgia, and 
unspecified neuralgia) from large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
datasets and the FinnGen database. We used bidirectional Mendelian randomization 
(MR) analysis to explore the causal association between gut microbiota and 
neuropathic pain. Additionally, we conducted a mediation analysis to identify 
whether immune cells and inflammatory factors act as mediators within these 
causal relationships.
RESULTS: Our study revealed 30 causal relationships between 26 gut bacterial 
taxa and five types of neuropathic pain, including four associated with 
drug-induced neuropathy, six with postherpetic neuralgia, five with sciatica, 
eight with trigeminal neuralgia, and seven with unspecified neuralgia. Moreover, 
we identified 35 gut bacterial pathway abundances causally involved in 
neuropathic pain. The reverse MR analysis showed no evidence of reverse 
causality from gut microbiota to neuropathic pain. Mediation analysis 
demonstrated that the immune cell phenotype "HLA-DR++ monocyte % leukocyte" 
mediated the causal relationship between p_Proteobacteria and sciatica with a 
mediation proportion of 36.15% (P = 0.038), whereas "CD11c on CD62L+ myeloid 
dendritic cell" mediated the causal pathway from assimilatory sulfate reduction 
to trigeminal neuralgia with a mediation proportion of 27.90% (P = 0.041).
CONCLUSION: This study identified the causal relationships between several 
specific gut microbiota and various neuropathic pain subtypes. Additionally, two 
immune cells may act as potential mediators in the pathways from gut microbiota 
to neuropathic pain.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s10194-024-01906-z
PMCID: PMC11555962
PMID: 39528917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to 
participate Ethical approval was not applicable because this study used data 
from publicly available databases. Consent for publication Not application. 
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2024 Nov 7;191:275-286. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020.
Online  ahead of print.

Associations of the gut microbiome with outcomes in cervical and endometrial 
cancer patients treated with pembrolizumab: Insights from the phase II PRIMMO 
trial.

De Jaeghere EA(1), Hamerlinck H(2), Tuyaerts S(3), Lippens L(4), Van Nuffel 
AMT(5), Baiden-Amissah R(6), Vuylsteke P(7), Henry S(8), Trinh XB(9), van Dam 
PA(10), Aspeslagh S(11), De Caluwé A(12), Naert E(13), Lambrechts D(14), Hendrix 
A(15), De Wever O(16), Van de Vijver KK(17), Amant F(18), Vandecasteele K(19), 
Verhasselt B(20), Denys HG(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: emiel.dejaeghere@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: hannelore.hamerlinck@uzgent.be.
(3)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Medical Oncology, 
University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; Laboratory for Medical and 
Molecular Oncology (LMMO), VUB, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
sandra.tuyaerts@uzbrussel.be.
(4)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: lien.lippens@ugent.be.
(5)Anticancer Fund (ACF), Strombeek-Bever, Belgium.
(6)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
reginaesimensimah.baidenamissah@kuleuven.be.
(7)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: peter.vuylsteke@uclouvain.be.
(8)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: stephanie.henry@uclouvain.be.
(9)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), University 
Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research (CORE), 
Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, Belgium. 
Electronic address: xuanbich.trinh@uza.be.
(10)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital 
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), 
University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research 
(CORE), Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, 
Belgium. Electronic address: peter.vandam@uza.be.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, 
Belgium. Electronic address: sandrine.aspeslagh@uzbrussel.be.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium; 
Department of Radiation Oncology, General Hospital Sint-Maarten, Mechelen, 
Belgium. Electronic address: alex.decaluwe@bordet.be.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
eline.naert@ugent.be.
(14)VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, Belgium. Electronic address: 
diether.lambrechts@kuleuven.be.
(15)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: an.hendrix@ugent.be.
(16)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: olivier.dewever@ugent.be.
(17)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; Center for Gynecologic 
Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer Institute and Amsterdam Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
koen.vandevijver@uzgent.be.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Center for Gynecologic Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer 
Institute and Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: f.amant@nki.nl.
(19)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: katrien.vandecasteele@uzgent.be.
(20)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
Electronic address: bruno.verhasselt@uzgent.be.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
hannelore.denys@ugent.be.

BACKGROUND: The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen 
in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) 
carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory 
studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented.
METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained 
from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta 
diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear 
discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, 
disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were 
performed.
RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with 
the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall 
or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM 
taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between 
patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those 
with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its 
higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its 
Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct 
bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than 
four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence 
interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but 
non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data.
CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the 
intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and 
EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT 
Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020
PMID: 39515198

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest EAD: travel 
and accommodation expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, GSK, 
and Pfizer. AMTV: became an employee for GSK during the publication development. 
PV: consulting or advisory role (personal) from Eli Lily and Company, MSD, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche; research funding from Tesaro. SH: 
consulting or advisory role (personal) from AstraZeneca, BMSi, Gilead Sciences, 
Merck, MSD Oncology, Novartis, and Sanofi. SA: consulting or advisory role 
(institutional, not personal) for MSD, Sanofi, Roche, BMS, and Pfizer; research 
funding (institutional, not personal) from Sanofi. AD: research funding 
(institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca. EN: travel and accommodation 
expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pfizer, 
PharmaMar, Roche, and Teva. FA: consulting or advisory role (institutional, not 
personal) for MiMark. KV: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, not 
personal) from PharmaMar. HGD: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, 
not personal) from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lily and Company, GSK, MSD, Novartis, 
Pfizer, PharmaMar, Roche, Tesaro, and Teva; research funding (institutional, not 
personal) from Roche. HH, ST, LL, RB, XBT, PAV, AH, OD, KKV, and BV: declare no 
competing interests.

1. Front Plant Sci. 2024 Oct 15;15:1445713. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2024.1445713. 
eCollection 2024.

The microbiome and metatranscriptome of a panel from the Sarracenia mapping 
population reveal complex assembly and function involving host influence.

Cai J(1), Mohsin I(2), Rogers W(3), Zhang M(4), Jiang L(5), Malmberg R(3), 
Alabady M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Statistics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United States.
(3)Department of Plant Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United 
States.
(4)Quantitative Sciences Unit, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, United States.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, 
United States.

Sarracenia provide an optimal system for deciphering the host-microbiome 
interactions at various levels. We analyzed the pitcher microbiomes and 
metatranscriptomes of the parental species, and F1 and F2 generations from the 
mapping population (Sarracenia purpurea X Sarracenia psittacina) utilizing 
high-throughput sequencing methods. This study aimed to examine the host 
influences on the microbiome structure and function and to identify the key 
microbiome traits. Our quality datasets included 8,892,553 full-length bacterial 
16s rRNA gene sequences and 65,578 assembled metatranscripts with microbial 
protein annotations. The correlation network of the bacterial microbiome 
revealed the presence of 3-7 distinct community clusters, with 8 hub and 19 
connector genera. The entire microbiome consisted of viruses, bacterial, 
archaea, and fungi. The richness and diversity of the microbiome varied among 
the parental species and offspring genotypes despite being under the same 
greenhouse environmental conditions. We have discovered certain microbial taxa 
that are genotype-enriched, including the community hub and connector genera. 
Nevertheless, there were no significant differences observed in the functional 
enrichment analysis of the metatranscriptomes across the different genotypes, 
suggesting a functional convergence of the microbiome. We found that the pitcher 
microcosm harbors both rhizosphere and phyllosphere microbiomes within its 
boundaries, resulting in a structurally diverse and functionally complex 
microbiome community. A total of 50,424 microbial metatranscripts were linked to 
plant growth-promoting microbial proteins. We show that this complex pitcher 
microbiome possesses various functions that contribute to plant growth 
promotion, such as biofertilization, bioremediation, phytohormone signaling, 
stress regulation, and immune response stimulation. Additionally, the pitcher 
microbiome exhibits traits related to microbe-microbe interactions, such as 
colonization of plant systems, biofilm formation, and microbial competitive 
exclusion. In summary, the demonstrated taxonomical divergence and functionally 
convergence of the pitcher microbiome are impacted by the host genetics, making 
it an excellent system for discovering novel beneficial microbiome traits.

Copyright © 2024 Cai, Mohsin, Rogers, Zhang, Jiang, Malmberg and Alabady.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2024.1445713
PMCID: PMC11518717
PMID: 39474216

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Oct 28;24(1):440. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03529-5.

Insights into the gut microbiome of vitiligo patients from India.

Kumar S(1), Mahajan S(1), Kale D(1), Chourasia N(2), Khan A(2), Asati D(2), 
Kotnis A(3), Sharma VK(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research Bhopal, Bhopal, India.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bhopal, India.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), 
Bhopal, India. Ashwin.BioChemistry@aiimsbhopal.edu.in.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research Bhopal, Bhopal, India. vineetks@iiserb.ac.in.

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is an autoimmune disease characterized by loss of 
pigmentation in the skin. It affects 0.4 to 2% of the global population, but the 
factors that trigger autoimmunity remain elusive. Previous work on several 
immune-mediated dermatological disorders has illuminated the substantial roles 
of the gut microbiome in disease pathogenesis. Here, we examined the gut 
microbiome composition in a cohort of vitiligo patients and healthy controls 
from India, including patients with a family history of the disease.
RESULTS: Our results show significant alterations in the gut microbiome of 
vitiligo patients compared to healthy controls, affecting taxonomic and 
functional profiles as well as community structure. We observed a reduction in 
the abundance of several bacterial taxa commonly associated with a healthy gut 
microbiome and noted a decrease in the abundance of SCFA (Short Chain Fatty 
Acids) producing taxa in the vitiligo group. Observation of a higher abundance 
of genes linked to bacteria-mediated degradation of intestinal mucus suggested a 
potential compromise of the gut mucus barrier in vitiligo. Functional analysis 
also revealed a higher abundance of fatty acid and lipid metabolism-related 
genes in the vitiligo group. Combined analysis with data from a French cohort of 
vitiligo also led to the identification of common genera differentiating healthy 
and gut microbiome across populations.
CONCLUSION: Our observations, together with available data, strengthen the role 
of gut microbiome dysbiosis in symptom exacerbation and possibly pathogenesis in 
vitiligo. The reported microbiome changes also showed similarities with other 
autoimmune disorders, suggesting common gut microbiome-mediated mechanisms in 
autoimmune diseases. Further investigation can lead to the exploration of 
dietary interventions and probiotics for the management of these conditions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03529-5
PMCID: PMC11514916
PMID: 39468434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Pathogens. 2024 Oct 16;13(10):906. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13100906.

Schistosomiasis-Microbiota Interactions: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Afful P(1), Abotsi GK(1), Adu-Gyamfi CO(1), Benyem G(1), Katawa G(2), Kyei 
S(1)(3), Arndts K(4)(5), Ritter M(4)(5), Asare KK(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical and Clinical Research Centre, College of Health and Allied 
Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(2)Unité de Recherche en Immunologie et Immunomodulation (UR2IM)/Laboratoire de 
Microbiologie et de Contrôle de Qualité des Denrées Alimentaires (LAMICODA), 
Ecole Supérieure des Techniques Biologiques et Alimentaires, Université de Lomé, 
Lomé, Togo.
(3)Department of Optometry and Vision Science, College of Health and Allied 
Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology (IMMIP), 
University Hospital Bonn (UKB), 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(5)German-West African Centre for Global Health and Pandemic Prevention (G-WAC), 
Partner Site Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Allied Health Sciences, College 
of Health and Allied Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(7)Department of Immunology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

INTRODUCTION: Schistosomiasis, a tropical disease affecting humans and animals, 
affected 251.4 million people in 2021. Schistosoma mansoni, S. haematobium, S. 
intercalatum, and S. japonicum are primary human schistosomes, causing tissue 
damage, granulomas, ulceration, hemorrhage, and opportunistic pathogen entry. 
The gut and urinary tract microbiota significantly impact a host's 
susceptibility to schistosomiasis, disrupting microbial balance; however, this 
relationship is not well understood. This systematic review and meta-analysis 
explores the intricate relationship between schistosomiasis and the host's 
microbiota, providing crucial insights into disease pathogenesis and management.
METHODS: This systematic review used PRISMA guidelines to identify peer-reviewed 
articles on schistosomiasis and its interactions with the host microbiome, using 
multiple databases and Google Scholar, providing a robust dataset for analysis. 
The study utilized Meta-Mar v3.5.1; descriptive tests, random-effects models, 
and subgroups were analyzed for the interaction between Schistosomiasis and the 
microbiome. Forest plots, Cochran's Q test, and Higgins' inconsistency statistic 
(I2) were used to assess heterogeneity.
RESULTS: The human Schistosoma species were observed to be associated with 
various bacterial species isolated from blood, stool, urine, sputum, skin, and 
vaginal or cervical samples. A meta-analysis of the interaction between 
schistosomiasis and the host microbiome, based on 31 studies, showed 29,784 
observations and 5871 events. The pooled estimates indicated a significant 
association between schistosomiasis and changes in the microbiome of infected 
individuals. There was considerable heterogeneity with variance effect sizes (p 
< 0.0001). Subgroup analysis of Schistosoma species demonstrated that S. 
haematobium was the most significant contributor to the overall heterogeneity, 
accounting for 62.1% (p < 0.01). S. mansoni contributed 13.0% (p = 0.02), and 
the coinfection of S. haematobium and S. mansoni accounted for 16.8% of the 
heterogeneity (p < 0.01), contributing to the variability seen in the pooled 
analysis. Similarly, praziquantel treatment (RR = 1.68, 95% CI: 1.07-2.64) 
showed high heterogeneity (Chi2 = 71.42, df = 11, p < 0.01) and also indicated 
that Schistosoma infections in males (RR = 1.46, 95% CI: 0.00 to 551.30) and 
females (RR = 2.09, 95% CI: 0.24 to 18.31) have a higher risk of altering the 
host microbiome.
CONCLUSIONS: Schistosomiasis significantly disrupts the host microbiota across 
various bodily sites, leading to increased susceptibility to different bacterial 
taxa such as E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, 
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Mycobacterium species (M. tuberculosis and M. 
leprae). This disruption enables these bacteria to produce toxic metabolites, 
which in turn cause inflammation and facilitate the progression of disease. The 
impact of schistosomiasis on the vaginal microbiome underscores the necessity 
for gender-specific approaches to treatment and prevention. Effective management 
of female genital schistosomiasis (FGS) requires addressing both the parasitic 
infection and the resulting microbiome imbalances. Additionally, 
praziquantel-treated individuals have different microbiome compositions compared 
to individuals with no praziquantel treatment. This suggests that combining 
praziquantel treatment with probiotics could potentially decrease the disease 
severity caused by an altered microbiome.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13100906
PMCID: PMC11510367
PMID: 39452777

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2024 Nov 1;286:117214. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.117214. Epub 2024 Oct 23.

Bioaccumulation of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and microbiota dynamics 
across developmental stages of the Asian tiger mosquito, Aedes albopictus 
exposed to urban pollutants.

Antonelli P(1), Grizard S(1), Tran FH(1), Lejon D(2), Bellemain A(2), Van(1), 
Mavingui P(3), Roiz D(4), Simard F(4), Martin E(1), Abrouk D(1), Vigneron A(1), 
Minard G(1), Valiente Moro C(5).

Author information:
(1)Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Laboratoire d'Ecologie Microbienne, UMR 
CNRS 5557, UMR INRAE 1418, VetAgrop Sup, 69622 Villeurbanne, France.
(2)Rovaltain Research Company, Valence, France.
(3)UMR PIMIT, Processus Infectieux en Milieu Insulaire Tropical, CNRS 9192, 
INSERM U1187, IRD 249, Université de La Réunion, Sainte-Clotilde, La 
Réunion, France.
(4)MIVEGEC, Univ. Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France.
(5)Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Laboratoire d'Ecologie Microbienne, UMR 
CNRS 5557, UMR INRAE 1418, VetAgrop Sup, 69622 Villeurbanne, France. Electronic 
address: claire.valiente-moro@univ-lyon1.fr.

Aedes albopictus mosquitoes face numerous anthropic stressors in urban areas. 
These xenobiotics not only impact mosquito physiology but also shape the 
composition of their microbiota, which play important roles in host 
physiological traits. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are ubiquitous 
environmental pollutants known to alter mosquito metabolism, but no studies have 
yet investigated their impact on microbiota. Using a bespoke indoor mesocosm 
tailored for Ae. albopictus mosquitoes, we investigated the dynamics of 
bacterial communities in both mosquitoes and their larval breeding sites 
following chronic exposure to a cocktail of PAHs consisting of benzo[a]pyrene, 
benz[a]anthracene, chrysene and benzo[b]fluoranthene. Our findings showed that 
PAHs have a stage-specific effect on mosquito microbiota, with a higher impact 
in larvae than in adults, contributing to 12.5 % and 4.5 % of the PAHs-induced 
variations, respectively. The presence of PAHs in the treated mesocosm led to 
the enrichment of bacterial families and genera known for their ability to 
catabolize PAHs, such as Comamonadaceae and Raoultella (increasing from 19 % to 
30 % and from 1.2 % to 5.6 %, respectively). Conversely, prevalent taxa found in 
mosquito microbiota like Wolbachia and Cedecea exhibited a reduction (decreasing 
from 4 % to 0.8 % and from 12.8 % to 6.4 %, respectively). This reduction could 
be attributed to the competitive advantage gained by PAH-degrading taxa, or it 
could reflect a direct sensitivity to PAH exposure. Overall, this indicates a 
shift in microbiota composition favoring bacteria that can thrive in a 
PAH-contaminated environment. PAHs persisted in the water of breeding sites only 
the first 45 days of the experiment. Benzo[a]pyrene and benzo[b]fluoranthene 
were more susceptible to bioaccumulation in larval tissues over time. Overall, 
this study enhances our understanding of the impact of pollution on mosquitoes 
and could facilitate future research on the importance of symbiosis in 
urban-dwelling insect disease vectors. Given the recent advancements in the 
generation of axenic (microbe-free) and gnotobiotic (mosquitoes with a defined 
or specific microbiota) mosquitoes, further studies are needed to explore how 
changes in microbiota composition could influence mosquito responses to 
pollution, particularly in relation to host fitness, immunity, and vector 
competence.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2024.117214
PMID: 39447296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Data Brief. 2024 Sep 19;57:110957. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110957. eCollection
 2024 Dec.

Dataset of 16S rRNA gene sequences of 111 healthy and Newcastle disease infected 
caecal samples from multiple chicken breeds of Pakistan.

Ameer A(1)(2), Saleem F(1), Keating C(3)(4), Gundogdu O(5), Ijaz UZ(2)(6)(7), 
Javed S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Water & Environment Research Group, University of Glasgow, Mazumdar-Shaw 
Advanced Research Centre, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Engineering, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.
(4)School of Biodiversity, One Health, and Veterinary Medicine, College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)College of Science and Engineering, University of Galway, Ireland.

The article presents a processed dataset from amplicon sequencing of the V4 
region of the 16S rRNA gene to recover bacterial and archaeal taxa from the 
caeca of multiple chicken breeds of Pakistan. These include chicken breeds 
commonly raised at commercial level, Naked Neck, Black Australorp, Rhode Island 
Red, White Layer, and Broiler. All the breeds were challenged with Newcastle 
Disease Virus (NDV), with vaccination against the disease also explored. This 
resulted in samples belonging to four treatment groups as: Control; Vaccinated; 
Vaccinated and Challenged; and Non-vaccinated and Challenged. These were raised 
on an antibiotic free diet in a semi-controlled farming setup. 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon sequencing of caecal DNA from day old and mature chicken samples (22 
weeks for Naked Neck, Black Australorp, Rhode Island Red and White Layer; 8 
weeks for Broiler) of the four groups was performed. The paired-end reads from 
all the samples were quality trimmed, error corrected, and overlapped, on which 
unique Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were obtained at 99 % similarity. 
Using predictive modelling, the MetaCyc functional pathways, as well as KEGG 
orthologs were also recovered. The generated data may be used to explore 
microbial interactions in gastrointestinal tract with respect to NDV vaccination 
and infection, together with increased understanding of chicken health and 
productivity.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110957
PMCID: PMC11461973
PMID: 39386325

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Nov;14(11):2971-2986. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01281-2. Epub 2024 Oct 10.

Association Between Scalp Microbiota Imbalance, Disease Severity, and Systemic 
Inflammatory Markers in Alopecia Areata.

Gómez-Arias PJ(#)(1)(2), Gay-Mimbrera J(#)(1), Rivera-Ruiz I(1)(2), 
Aguilar-Luque M(1), Juan-Cencerrado M(1)(2), Mochón-Jiménez C(1)(2), 
Gómez-García F(1)(2), Sánchez-González S(3), Ortega-Hernández A(3), Gómez-Garre 
D(4), Parra-Peralbo E(5), Isla-Tejera B(6)(7), Ruano J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Immune-Mediated Chronic Skin Diseases Laboratory, IMIBIC/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, 14004, Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Reina Sofía University Hospital, 14004, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Microbiota, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), 4ª Planta Sur, C/ 
Profesor Martín Lagos, S/N, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Microbiota, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), 4ª Planta Sur, C/ 
Profesor Martín Lagos, S/N, 28040, Madrid, Spain. mgomezgarre@salud.madrid.org.
(5)Department of Pharmacy and Nutrition, Faculty of Biomedical Science and 
Health, Universidad Europea, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Inflammatory Immune-Mediated Chronic Skin Diseases Laboratory, IMIBIC/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, 14004, Córdoba, Spain. 
beatrizislatj@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Reina Sofía University Hospital, 14004, Córdoba, 
Spain. beatrizislatj@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Alopecia areata (AA) is an autoimmune disease causing non-scarring 
hair loss, with both genetic and environmental factors implicated. Recent 
research highlights a possible role for scalp microbiota in influencing both 
local and systemic inflammatory responses, potentially impacting AA progression. 
This study examines the link among scalp microbiota imbalances, AA severity, and 
systemic inflammation.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study with 24 participants, including 
patients with AA of varying severities and healthy controls. Scalp microbial 
communities were analyzed using swab samples and ion torrent sequencing of the 
16S rRNA gene across multiple hypervariable regions. We explored correlations 
among bacterial abundance, microbiome metabolic pathways, and circulating 
inflammatory markers.
RESULTS: Our findings reveal significant dysbiosis in the scalp microbiota of 
patients with AA compared to healthy controls. Severe AA cases had an increased 
presence of pro-inflammatory microbial taxa like Proteobacteria, whereas milder 
cases had higher levels of anti-inflammatory Actinobacteria. Notable species 
differences included abundant gram-negative bacteria such as Alistipes inops and 
Bacteroides pleibeius in severe AA, contrasted with Blautia faecis and 
Pyramydobacter piscolens predominantly in controls. Significantly, microbial 
imbalance correlated with AA severity (SALT scores) and systemic inflammatory 
markers, with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines linked to more severe disease.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that scalp microbiota may play a role in 
AA-related inflammation, although it is unclear whether the shifts are a cause 
or consequence of hair loss. Further research is needed to clarify the causal 
relationship and mechanisms involved.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01281-2
PMCID: PMC11557780
PMID: 39384736

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of Interest Juan Ruano is 
a member of the Editorial Board of Dermatology and Therapy but was not involved 
in the peer review or editorial decisions for this manuscript. All other (Pedro 
J. Gómez-Arias, Jesús Gay-Mimbrera, Irene Rivera-Ruiz, Macarena Aguilar-Luque, 
Miguel Juan-Cencerrado, Carmen Mochón-Jiménez, Francisco Gómez-García, Silvia 
Sánchez-González, Adriana Ortega-Hernández, Dulcenombre Gómez-Garre, Esmeralda 
Parra-Peralbo and Beatriz Isla-Tejera) co-authors declare no conflicts of 
interest. Ethical Approval Reviewed and approved by Provincial Research Ethics 
Committee of Córdoba, Spain; approval # HRP-503, August 2015. The legislation in 
effect in 2015 has not changed in a way that would impact the validity of the 
approval, and the original approved protocol remains relevant to the current 
study. No changes have been made to the study, such as modifications in 
methodology, inclusion of new participants, or alterations in study conditions, 
that would invalidate the initial approval. The research was conducted following 
the standards of good clinical practice and adhering to the principles outlined 
in the by the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 1983, and Belmont 
Report and adhered to Spanish and European laws regarding data privacy. Before 
participation, all patients provided informed consent after receiving and 
reviewing the patient information sheet.

1. Epilepsia Open. 2024 Oct 9. doi: 10.1002/epi4.13074. Online ahead of print.

Causal relationship between oral microbiota and epilepsy risk: Evidence from 
Mendelian randomization analysis in East Asians.

Zhao C(1)(2), Chen F(3), Li Q(1)(2), Zhang W(1), Peng L(1)(2), Yue C(4).

Author information:
(1)The First People's Hospital of Chenzhou, Chenzhou, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Huadong Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Gut microbiota can traverse into the brain, activate the vagus nerve, 
and modulate immune responses and inflammatory processes, thereby influencing 
the onset of epileptic seizures. However, research on oral microbiota and 
epilepsy remains limited, and observational studies have been inconsistent. We 
aim to estimate the potential links between oral microbiota and epilepsy and 
elucidate which specific oral microbes may directly influence the pathogenesis 
of epilepsy.
METHODS: A two-sample MR analysis was conducted using genome-wide association 
study (GWAS) data specific to OM and epilepsy in East Asian individuals. Single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) independent of confounders served as 
instrumental variables (IVs) to deduce causality. MR methodologies, including 
inverse variance weighted (IVW), MR-Egger, weighted median, and weighed mode 
methods, were utilized. Sensitivity analysis, including Cochrane's Q test, 
MR-Egger intercept test, and leave-one-out analysis, was applied to confirm the 
robustness of results.
RESULTS: Among the 3117 bacterial taxa examined, we observed that 14 OM, like 
s_Streptococcus_mitis, s_Streptococcus_pneumoniae, and s_Haemophilus, were 
positively associated with epilepsy, while 7 OM, like g_Fusobacterium and 
g_Aggregatibacter, were negatively related to epilepsy. The MR-Egger intercept 
suggested that no evidence of horizontal pleiotropy was observed (p > 0.05). The 
leave-one-out analysis validated the robustness of the results.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study underscores the effect of OM on epilepsy, suggesting 
potential mechanisms between the OM and epilepsy. Further investigation into the 
potential role of the OM is needed to enhance our in-depth understanding of the 
pathogenesis of epilepsy.
PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: Previous research has demonstrated that the microbiota 
may influence the onset of epileptic seizures. We applied 3117 oral microbiota 
from the newest publicly available database of East Asian populations. Mendelian 
randomization analysis was utilized to estimate the causal relationship between 
oral microbiota and epilepsy. Our results showed that a causal effect exists 
between 21 oral microbiota and epilepsy. We provided genetic evidence for risk 
assessment and early intervention in epilepsy.

© 2024 The Author(s). Epilepsia Open published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1002/epi4.13074
PMID: 39382490

1. Gut Pathog. 2024 Oct 8;16(1):58. doi: 10.1186/s13099-024-00643-7.

Dietary patterns drive loss of fiber-foraging species in the celiac disease 
patients gut microbiota compared to first-degree relatives.

Roque A(1), Zanker J(1), Brígido S(2), Tomaz MB(2), Gonçalves A(3), Barbeiro 
S(3), Benítez-Páez A(#)(4), Pereira SG(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology (ciTechCare), School of 
Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria, 2410-541, Leiria, Portugal.
(2)Labeto, Centro de Análises Bioquímicas SA, Beatriz Godinho Laboratories, 
2410-152, Leiria, Portugal.
(3)Gastroentherology Division, Leiria Central Hospital, Leiria Region Local 
Health Unit, 2410-197, Leiria, Portugal.
(4)Microbiome, Nutrition, and Health Research Unit, Institute of Agrochemistry 
and Food Technology (IATA-CSIC), 46980, Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology (ciTechCare), School of 
Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria, 2410-541, Leiria, Portugal. 
sonia.pereira@ipleiria.pt.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder triggered by dietary gluten 
in genetically predisposed individuals that primarily affects the small 
intestine. Studies have reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa in the 
gut microbiota of celiac patients compared with non-celiac controls. However, 
findings across studies have inconsistencies and no microbial signature of 
celiac disease has been defined so far.
RESULTS: Here, we showed, by comparing celiac patients with their non-celiac 
1st-degree relatives, that bacterial communities of related individuals have 
similar species occurrence and abundance compared with non-relatives, regardless 
the disease status. We also found in celiac patients a loss of bacterial species 
associated with fiber degradation, and host metabolic and immune modulation, as 
ruminiclostridia, ruminococci, Prevotella, and Akkermansia muciniphila species. 
We demonstrated that the differential abundance of bacterial species correlates 
to different dietary patterns observed between the two groups. For instance, 
Ruminiclostridium siraeum, Ruminococcus bicirculans, and Bacteroides plebeious, 
recognized as fiber-degraders, appear more abundant in non-celiac 1st-degree 
relatives, which have a vegetable consumption pattern higher than celiac 
patients. Pattern of servings per day also suggests a possible link between 
these species' abundance and daily calorie intake.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we evidenced that a kinship approach could be valuable in 
unveiling potential celiac disease microbial traits, as well as the significance 
of dietary factors in shaping microbial profiles and their influence on disease 
development and progression. Our results pave the way for designing and adopting 
novel dietary strategies based on gluten-free fiber-enriched ingredients to 
improve disease management and patients' quality of life.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13099-024-00643-7
PMCID: PMC11459851
PMID: 39375796

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Dairy Sci. 2024 Oct 4:S0022-0302(24)01199-8. doi: 10.3168/jds.2024-25455. 
Online ahead of print.

Exploring the Gut Microbiota Landscape in Cow Milk Protein Allergy: Clinical 
Insights and Diagnostic Implications in Pediatric Patients.

Xu J(1), Sheikh TMM(2), Shafiq M(3), Khan MN(2), Wang M(2), Guo X(2), Yao F(2), 
Xie Q(2), Yang Z(4), Khalid A(5), Jiao X(6).

Author information:
(1)Precision Medical Lab Center, Chaozhou Central Hospital Affiliated to 
Southern Medical University, Chaozhou, China; Department of Cell Biology and 
Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, 515041, China.
(3)Research Institute of Clinical Pharmacy, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, 515041, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Chaozhou Central Hospital Affiliated to Southern 
Medical University, Chaozhou, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Federal Medical College, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, 515041, China. Electronic address: xyjiao@stu.edu.cn.

Cow milk protein allergy (CMPA) is a significant health concern characterized by 
adverse immune reactions to cow milk proteins. Biomarkers for the accurate 
diagnosis and prognosis of CMPA are lacking. This study analyzed the clinical 
features of CMPA, and 16S RNA sequencing was used to investigate potential 
biomarkers through fecal microbiota profiling. Children with CMPA exhibit a 
range of clinical symptoms, including gastrointestinal (83% of patients), skin 
(53% of patients), and respiratory manifestations (26% of patients), 
highlighting the complexity of this condition. Laboratory analysis revealed 
significant differences in red cell distribution width (RDW) and inflammatory 
markers between the CMPA and control groups, suggesting immune activation and 
inflammatory responses in CMPA. Microbial diversity analysis revealed higher 
specific diversity indices in the CMPA group compared with those in control 
group, with significant differences at the genus and species levels. Bacteroides 
were more abundant in the CMPA group, whereas Bifidobacterium, Ruminococcus, 
Faecalibacterium, and Parabacteroides were less abundant. The control group 
exhibited a balanced microbial profile, with a predominant presence of 
Bifidobacterium bifidum and Akkermansia muciniphila. The significant abundance 
of Bifidobacterium in the control group (23.19% vs 9.89% in CMPA) was associated 
with improved growth metrics such as height and weight, suggesting its potential 
as a probiotic to prevent CMPA and enhance gut health. Correlation analysis 
linked specific microbial taxa such as Coprococcus and Bifidobacterium to 
clinical parameters such as family allergy history, weight and height, providing 
insights into CMPA pathogenesis. Significant differences in bacterial abundance 
suggested diagnostic potential, with a panel of 6 bacteria achieving high 
predictive accuracy (area under curve (AUC) = 0.8708). This study emphasizes the 
complex relationship between the gut microbiota and CMPA, offering valuable 
insights into disease mechanisms and diagnostic strategies.

© 2024, The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Dairy 
Science Association®. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2024-25455
PMID: 39369895

1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2024 Sep 3;11(9):ofae506. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofae506. 
eCollection 2024 Sep.

Gut Microbial and Metabolic Features Associated With Clostridioides difficile 
Infection Recurrence in Children.

Li X(1), Xiao F(1), Wang X(1), Ye L(1), Xiao Y(1), Li D(1), Zhang T(1)(2), Wang 
Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Shanghai Children's 
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Gut Microbiota and Metabolic Research Center, Institute of Pediatric 
Infection, Immunity and Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is a critical 
clinical issue due to the increase in incidence and difficulty in treatment. We 
aimed to identify gut microbial and metabolic features associated with disease 
recurrence in a group of pediatric CDI patients.
METHODS: A total of 84 children with primary CDI were prospectively enrolled in 
the study. Fecal samples collected at the initial diagnosis were subjected to 
16S rRNA gene sequencing and targeted metabolomics analysis to profile the 
bacterial composition and metabolome.
RESULTS: Twenty-six of 84 (31.0%) pediatric CDI patients experienced recurrence. 
The alpha diversity of the fecal microbiota was significantly lower in the 
recurrent group than in the nonrecurrent group, and the beta diversity was 
different from that of the nonrecurrent group. Taxonomic proﬁles revealed that 
the relative abundances of multiple bacterial taxa significantly differed 
between the recurrent and nonrecurrent groups. Linear discriminant analysis 
effect size analysis identified several bacterial genera that discriminated 
between recurrent and nonrecurrent groups, including Parabacteroides, 
Coprococcus, Dialister, and Clostridium. Recurrent bacteria presented lower 
abundances of several short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria 
(Faecalibacterium, Butyricicoccus, Clostridium, Roseburia, and Ruminococcus), 
which were correlated with reduced fecal SCFA levels. In addition, several bile 
acids, including lithocholic acid (LCA), 12-ketoLCA, trihydroxycholestanoic 
acid, and deoxycholic acid, were decreased in recurrent patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the differing gut microbiota profiles in 
pediatric CDI patients may contribute to disease recurrence by modulating SCFA 
concentrations and bile acid profiles. The gut microbiota and metabolite 
signatures may be used to predict disease recurrence in children with CDI.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofae506
PMCID: PMC11420671
PMID: 39319090

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. All authors: No 
potential conflicts of interest.

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2024 Sep 20;24(1):1020. doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-09948-z.

High abundance of butyrate-producing bacteria in the naso-oropharynx of 
SARS-CoV-2-infected persons in an African population: implications for low 
disease severity.

Akorli J(1), Opoku M(2)(3), Appiah-Twum F(2), Akpo MS(2), Ismail RY(2), Boamah 
GYK(2), Obeng-Aboagye E(4), Adu-Asamoah D(5), Donkor IO(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana. jakorli@noguchi.ug.edu.gh.
(2)Department of Parasitology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(3)Present address Department of Environment and Genetics, School of 
Agriculture, Biomedicine and Environment, La Trobe University, Bundoora, VIC, 
3086, Australia.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.
(5)Department of Virology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Legon-Accra, Ghana.

BACKGROUND: The association of the oral microbiome with SARS-CoV-2 infections 
and disease progression has been documented in European, Asian, and American 
populations but not in Africa.
METHODS: We conducted a study in Ghana to evaluate and compare the 
naso-oropharyngeal microbiome in SARS-CoV-2-infected and uninfected persons 
before (pre-vaccine) and after vaccine availability (post-vaccine) in the 
country. 16S rRNA V3-V4 variable region was sequenced and analysed from DNA 
extracted from naso-oropharyngeal swabs.
RESULTS: Considering only the infection status, infected and uninfected groups 
had no difference in their within-group diversity and was evident in the study 
population pre- and post-vaccine availability. The introduction of vaccines 
reduced the diversity of the naso-oropharyngeal microbiome particularly among 
SARS-CoV-2 positive persons and, vaccinated individuals (both infected and 
uninfected) had higher microbial diversity compared to their unvaccinated 
counterparts. SARS-CoV-2-positive and -negative individuals were largely 
compositionally similar varying by 4-7% but considering vaccination*infection 
statuses, the genetic distance increased to 12% (P = 0.003) and was mainly 
influenced by vaccination. Common among the pre- and post-vaccine samples, 
Atopobium and Finegoldia were abundant in infected and uninfected individuals, 
respectively. Bacteria belonging to major butyrate-producing phyla, Bacillota 
(particularly class Clostridia) and Bacteroidota showed increased abundance more 
strikingly in infected individuals before vaccines were available. They reduced 
significantly after vaccines were introduced into the country with Fusobacterium 
and Lachnoanaerobaculum being the only common bacteria between pre-vaccine 
infected persons and vaccinated individuals, suggesting that natural infection 
and vaccination correlate with high abundance of short-chain fatty acids.
CONCLUSION: Our results show, in an African cohort, the abundance of bacteria 
taxa known for their protective pathophysiological processes, especially during 
infection, suggesting that this population is protected against severe COVID-19. 
The immune-related roles of the members of Bacillota and Bacteroidota that were 
found associated with infection and vaccination require further studies, and how 
these may be linked to ethnicity, diet and age. We also recommend expansion of 
microbiome-disease association studies across Africa to identify possible 
bacterial-mediated therapeutics for emerging infections.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-024-09948-z
PMCID: PMC11414296
PMID: 39304808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2024 Sep 14;10(1):85. doi:
10.1038/s41522-024-00562-0.

Faecal microbiota and cytokine profiles of rural Cambodian infants linked to 
diet and diarrhoeal episodes.

Dalby MJ(1)(2), Kiu R(1)(2), Serghiou IR(2), Miyazaki A(3), Acford-Palmer H(2), 
Tung R(4), Caim S(2), Phillips S(2), Kujawska M(1)(2)(5), Matsui M(3), Iwamoto 
A(6), Taking B(7), Cox SE(3)(8)(9), Hall LJ(10)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Microbes, Infection and Microbiomes, College of Medicine and Health, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK.
(2)Food, Microbiome & Health, Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, UK.
(3)School of Tropical Medicine & Global Health, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, 
Japan.
(4)National Maternal and Child Health Centre, Ministry of Health, Phnom Penh, 
Cambodia.
(5)Intestinal Microbiome, School of Life Sciences, ZIEL - Institute for Food & 
Health, Technical University of Munich, Freising, 80333, Germany.
(6)Bureau of International Health Cooperation, National Centre for Global Health 
and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Kampong Cham Provincial Health Department, Ministry of Health, Kampong Cham, 
Cambodia.
(8)London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, Keppel Street, London, WC1E 
7HT, UK.
(9)Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.
(10)Microbes, Infection and Microbiomes, College of Medicine and Health, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. l.hall.3@bham.ac.uk.
(11)Food, Microbiome & Health, Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research 
Park, Norwich, NR4 7UQ, UK. l.hall.3@bham.ac.uk.
(12)Intestinal Microbiome, School of Life Sciences, ZIEL - Institute for Food & 
Health, Technical University of Munich, Freising, 80333, Germany. 
l.hall.3@bham.ac.uk.
(13)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park, 
Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK. l.hall.3@bham.ac.uk.

The gut microbiota of infants in low- to middle-income countries is 
underrepresented in microbiome research. This study explored the faecal 
microbiota composition and faecal cytokine profiles in a cohort of infants in a 
rural province of Cambodia and investigated the impact of sample storage 
conditions and infant environment on microbiota composition. Faecal samples 
collected at three time points from 32 infants were analysed for microbiota 
composition using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and concentrations of faecal 
cytokines. Faecal bacterial isolates were subjected to whole genome sequencing 
and genomic analysis. We compared the effects of two sample collection methods 
due to the challenges of faecal sample collection in a rural location. Storage 
of faecal samples in a DNA preservation solution preserved Bacteroides 
abundance. Microbiota analysis of preserved samples showed that Bifidobacterium 
was the most abundant genus with Bifidobacterium longum the most abundant 
species, with higher abundance in breast-fed infants. Most infants had 
detectable pathogenic taxa, with Shigella and Klebsiella more abundant in 
infants with recent diarrhoeal illness. Neither antibiotics nor infant growth 
were associated with gut microbiota composition. Genomic analysis of isolates 
showed gene clusters encoding the ability to digest human milk oligosaccharides 
in B. longum and B. breve isolates. Antibiotic-resistant genes were present in 
both potentially pathogenic species and in Bifidobacterium. Faecal 
concentrations of Interlukin-1alpha and vascular endothelial growth factor were 
higher in breast-fed infants. This study provides insights into an 
underrepresented population of rural Cambodian infants, showing pathogen 
exposure and breastfeeding impact gut microbiota composition and faecal immune 
profiles.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-024-00562-0
PMCID: PMC11401897
PMID: 39277573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 25;25(17):9222. doi: 10.3390/ijms25179222.

The Response of Murine Gut Microbiome in the Presence of Altered rpoS Gene of 
Klebsiella pneumoniae.

Iqbal MZ(1), He P(1), He P(1), Wu Y(1), Munir S(1), He Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bioresources in 
Yunnan, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China.

The murine model is invaluable for studying intricate interactions among gut 
microbes; hosts; and diseases. However; the impact of genetic variations in the 
murine microbiome; especially in disease contexts such as Klebsiella pneumoniae 
(Kp) infection; still needs to be explored. Kp; an opportunistic global 
pathogen; is becoming increasingly prevalent in regions like Asia; especially 
China. This study explored the role of the gut microbiota during Kp infection 
using mouse model; including wild-type and rpoS mutants of Kp138; KpC4; and KpE4 
from human; maize; and ditch water; respectively. Under stress conditions; RpoS 
reconfigures global gene expression in bacteria; shifting the cells from active 
growth to survival mode. Our study examined notable differences in microbiome 
composition; finding that Lactobacillus and Klebsiella (particularly in WKp138) 
were the most abundant genera in mice guts at the genus level in all wild-type 
treated mice. In contrast; Firmicutes were predominant in the healthy control 
mice. Furthermore; Clostridium was the dominant genus in all mutants; mainly in 
∆KpC4; and was absent in wild-type treated mice. Differential abundance analysis 
identified that these candidate taxa potentially influence disease progression 
and pathogen virulence. Functional prediction analysis showed that most 
bacterial groups were functionally involved in biosynthesis; precursor 
metabolites; degradation; energy generation; and metabolic cluster formation. 
These findings challenge the conventional understanding and highlight the need 
for nuanced interpretations in murine studies. Additionally; this study sheds 
light on microbiome-immune interactions in K. pneumoniae infection and proposes 
new potential therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25179222
PMCID: PMC11395600
PMID: 39273171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Lupus. 2024 Oct;33(12):1345-1357. doi: 10.1177/09612033241281891. Epub 2024
Sep  11.

Alterations of the microbiome across body sites in systemic lupus erythematosus: 
A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Wang Y(1)(2), Wu H(1)(2), Yan C(3), Huang R(1)(2), Li K(1)(2), Du Y(1)(2), Jin 
X(1)(2), Zhu G(3), Zeng H(3), Li B(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui 
Medical University, Hefei, China.
(2)Anhui Provincial Laboratory of Inflammatory and Immune Diseases, Hefei, 
China.
(3)Haiheng Community Health Service Center HETDA, Hefei, China.
(4)The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease 
with unclear etiology. Growing evidence suggests the microbiome plays a role in 
SLE pathogenesis. However, findings are inconsistent across studies due to 
factors like small sample sizes and geographical variations. A comprehensive 
meta-analysis is needed to elucidate microbiome alterations in SLE.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to provide a systematic overview of microbiota 
dysbiosis across body sites in SLE through a meta-analysis of alpha diversity 
indices, beta diversity indices, and abundance taxa of microbiome.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted across four databases to identify 
relevant studies comparing SLE patients and healthy controls. Extracted data 
encompassed alpha and beta diversity metrics, as well as bacterial, fungal, and 
viral abundance across gut, oral, skin, and other microbiota. Study quality was 
assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Standardized mean differences and 
pooled effect sizes were calculated through meta-analytical methods.
RESULTS: The analysis showed reduced alpha diversity and distinct beta diversity 
in SLE, particularly in the gut microbiota. Taxonomic analysis revealed 
compositional variations in bacteria from the gut and oral cavity. However, 
results for fungi, viruses, and bacteria from other sites were inconsistent due 
to limited studies.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis offers a comprehensive perspective on microbiome 
dysbiosis in SLE patients across diverse body sites and taxa. The observed 
variations underscore the microbiome's potential role in SLE pathogenesis. 
Future research should address geographical variations, employ longitudinal 
designs, and integrate multi-omics approaches.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033241281891
PMID: 39258896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

1. J Infect Dis. 2024 Sep 9:jiae406. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiae406. Online ahead of
 print.

Vaginal Bacteria and Proinflammatory Host Immune Mediators as Biomarkers of 
Human Immunodeficiency Virus Acquisition Risk Among African Women.

Srinivasan S(1), Richardson BA(1)(2)(3), Wallis JM(1), Fiedler TL(1), Strenk 
SM(1), Hoffman NG(4), Proll S(1), Chirenje ZM(5), Livant EW(6), Fredricks 
DN(1)(7), Hillier SL(6)(8), Marrazzo JM(9).

Author information:
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, 
Seattle, Washington.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Seattle, Washington.
(3)Department of Global Health, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington.
(5)Clinical Trial Research Center, University of Zimbabwe, Harare.
(6)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(7)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.
(8)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pennsylvania.
(9)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Few investigations have assessed contributions of both vaginal 
bacteria and proinflammatory immune mediators to human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) acquisition risk in a prospective cohort.
METHODS: We conducted a nested case-control study of African women who 
participated in a randomized placebo-controlled trial of daily oral versus 
vaginal tenofovir-based preexposure prophylaxis for HIV infection. Vaginal 
concentrations of 23 bacterial taxa and 16 immune mediators were measured. 
Relationships between individual bacterial concentrations or immune mediators 
and HIV risk were analyzed using generalized estimating equations in a 
multivariable model. Factor analysis assessed relationships between combinations 
of bacterial taxa, immune mediators, and HIV acquisition risk.
RESULTS: We identified 177 HIV pre-seroconversion visits from 150 women who 
acquired HIV and 531 visits from 436 women who remained HIV uninfected. Fourteen 
bacterial taxa and 6 proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines were individually 
associated with greater HIV risk after adjusting for confounders. Women with all 
14 taxa versus <14 taxa (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 4.45 [95% confidence 
interval {CI}, 2.20-8.98]; P < .001) or all 6 immune mediators versus <6 
mediators (aOR, 1.77 [95% CI, 1.24-2.52]; P < .001) had greater risk for HIV 
acquisition. Factor analysis demonstrated that a bacterial factor comprised of 
14 high-risk bacterial taxa (aOR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.27-1.93]; P < 0.001) and the 
interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (highest quartile: aOR, 3.19 [95% CI, 
1.32-7.72]; P = 0.002) contributed to the highest HIV risk.
CONCLUSIONS: Bacterial and host biomarkers for predicting HIV acquisition risk 
identify women at greatest risk for HIV infection and can focus prevention 
efforts.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For commercial 
re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiae406
PMID: 39248500

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. D. N. F. and T. 
L. F. receive royalties from Becton Dickinson. S. S. has received speaking 
honoraria from Lupin Inc. S. S. and D. N. F. have developed intellectual 
property around the molecular detection of bacteria associated with HIV risk. 
During the course of this study, S. L. H. received consulting fees from Dare 
Biosciences and Lupin Inc, and her institution received support from Dickinson, 
Lupin, Dare, and Curetek. B. A. R. has received payment from Gilead Sciences Inc 
for service as a data and safety monitoring board member for previous and 
ongoing clinical trials. All other authors report no potential conflicts. All 
authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of 
Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the 
manuscript have been disclosed.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Aug 21;15:1409497. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1409497. 
eCollection 2024.

Genetically predicted the causal relationship between gut microbiota and the 
risk of polymyositis/dermatomyositis: a Mendelian randomization analysis.

Niu Y(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(2)(3), Fan K(2)(3), Hou J(2)(3), Liu L(2)(3), Zhang 
H(2)(3), Geng X(2)(3), Ma X(2)(3), Lin S(2)(3), Guo M(2)(3), Li X(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang S(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Second Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, 
Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
(2)Shanxi Provincial Key Laboratory of Rheumatism Immune Microecology, Taiyuan, 
Shanxi, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Cellular Physiology at Shanxi Medical University, Ministry 
of Education, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.
(4)SXMU-Tsinghua Collaborative Innovation Center for Frontier Medicine, Shanxi 
medical university, Taiyuan, Shanxi, China.

INTRODUCTION: Observational studies suggest associations between gut microbiota 
and polymyositis (PM) and dermatomyositis (DM), but causal relationships are 
unclear. We investigate the causal effects of gut microbiota on PM and DM, 
providing insights hoping to provide insights for future treatment and 
prevention.
METHODS: Summary statistics of gut microbiota were obtained from a multi-ethnic 
Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) meta-analysis, including 119 taxa from 
18,340 Europeans. PM/DM statistics were extracted from GWAS analyses. Mendelian 
randomization (MR) with IVW, MR-Egger, and weighted median methods was 
performed. Sensitivity analyses addressed heterogeneity and pleiotropy. Of the 
119 bacterial genera studied, six showed causal links.
RESULTS: Alloprevotella (OR: 3.075, 95% CI: 1.127-8.386, p = 0.028), 
Ruminococcaceae UCG003 (OR: 4.219, 95% CI: 1.227-14.511, p = 0.022), Dialister 
(OR: 0.273, 95% CI: 0.077-0.974, p = 0.045) were associated with PM. 
Anaerotruncus (OR: 0.314, 95% CI: 0.112-0.882, p = 0.028), Ruminococcaceae 
UCG002 (OR: 2.439, 95% CI: 1.173-5.071, p = 0.017), Sutterella (OR: 3.392, 95% 
CI: 1.302-8.839, p = 0.012) were related to DM. Sensitivity analyses validated 
these associations.
DISCUSSION: We establish causal relationships between Ruminococcaceae, 
Sutterella, Anaerotruncus with DM, Alloprevotella, Ruminococcaceae UCG003, and 
Dialister with PM. Common microbiota, like Ruminococcaceae, have significant 
clinical implications. These findings open up greater possibilities for the gut 
microbiota to contribute to the development of PM/DM and for future monitoring 
of the gut microbiota in patients with PM/DM.

Copyright © 2024 Niu, Zhang, Fan, Hou, Liu, Zhang, Geng, Ma, Lin, Guo, Li and 
Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1409497
PMCID: PMC11371719
PMID: 39234555

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2024 Oct 23;90(10):e0090324. doi:
10.1128/aem.00903-24.  Epub 2024 Sep 4.

Using patterns of shared taxa to infer bacterial dispersal in human living 
environment in urban and rural areas.

Grönroos M(1), Jumpponen A(2), Roslund MI(3), Nurminen N(4), Oikarinen S(4), 
Parajuli A(1)(5), Laitinen OH(4), Cinek O(6), Kramna L(6), Rajaniemi J(7), Hyöty 
H(4)(8), Puhakka R(1), Sinkkonen A(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, University of Helsinki, 
Lahti, Finland.
(2)Division of Biology and Ecological Genomics Institute, Kansas State 
University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA.
(3)Natural Resources Institute Finland, Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Tampere, 
Finland.
(5)Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden.
(6)Department of Medical Microbiology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles 
University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)Faculty of Built Environment, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland.
(8)Fimlab Laboratories, Pirkanmaa Hospital District, Tampere, Finland.

Contact with environmental microbial communities primes the human immune system. 
Factors determining the distribution of microorganisms, such as dispersal, are 
thus important for human health. Here, we used the relative number of bacteria 
shared between environmental and human samples as a measure of bacterial 
dispersal and studied these associations with living environment and lifestyles. 
We analyzed amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) of the V4 region of 16S rDNA gene 
from 347 samples of doormat dust as well as samples of saliva, skin swabs, and 
feces from 53 elderly people in urban and rural areas in Finland at three 
timepoints. We first enumerated the ASVs shared between doormat and one of the 
human sample types (i.e., saliva, skin swab, or feces) of each individual 
subject and calculated the shared ASVs as a proportion of all ASVs in the given 
sample type of that individual. We observed that the patterns for the 
proportions of shared ASVs differed among seasons and human sample type. In skin 
samples, there was a negative association between the proportion of shared ASVs 
and the coverage of built environment (a proxy for degree of urbanization), 
whereas in saliva data, this association was positive. We discuss these findings 
in the context of differing species pools in urban and rural environments.
IMPORTANCE: Understanding how environmental microorganisms reach and interact 
with humans is a key question when aiming to increase human contacts with 
natural microbiota. Few methods are suitable for studying microbial dispersal at 
relatively large spatial scales. Thus, we tested an indirect method and studied 
patterns of bacterial taxa that are shared between humans and their living 
environment.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.00903-24
PMCID: PMC11498140
PMID: 39230286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.S., H.H., O.H.L., M.G., N.N., and S.O. are 
inventors in a patent, "Probiotic immunomodulatory compositions" (U.S. patent 
no. 11318173, U.S. Patent and Trademark Office). A.S., H.H., O.H.L., M.G., N.N., 
S.O., P.A., and M.I.R. have been named as inventors in one or both patent 
applications submitted by University of Helsinki (patent application numbers 
20175196 and 20165932, Finnish Patent and Registration Office). A.S., H.H., and 
O.H.L. are members of the board of Uute Scientific Ltd., which develops 
immunomodulatory treatments.

1. Microb Genom. 2024 Sep;10(9):001289. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.001289.

Infectious bronchitis virus vaccination, but not the presence of XCR1, is 
correlated with large differences in chicken caecal microbiota.

Glendinning L(1), Wu Z(1), Vervelde L(1)(2), Watson M(3)(4), Balic A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Royal GD Animal Health, Deventer, Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Digital Innovation, DSM Biotechnology Centre, Delft, Netherlands.
(4)Scotland's Rural College, Peter Wilson Building, King's Buildings, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

The chicken immune system and microbiota play vital roles in maintaining gut 
homeostasis and protecting against pathogens. In mammals, XCR1+ conventional 
dendritic cells (cDCs) are located in the gut-draining lymph nodes and play a 
major role in gut homeostasis. These cDCs sample antigens in the gut luminal 
contents and limit the inflammatory response to gut commensal microbes by 
generating appropriate regulatory and effector T-cell responses. We hypothesized 
that these cells play similar roles in sustaining gut homeostasis in chickens, 
and that chickens lacking XCR1 were likely to contain a dysbiotic caecal 
microbiota. Here we compare the caecal microbiota of chickens that were either 
heterozygous or homozygous XCR1 knockouts, that had or had not been vaccinated 
for infectious bronchitis virus (IBV). We used short-read (Illumina) and 
long-read (PacBio HiFi) metagenomic sequencing to reconstruct 670 high-quality, 
strain-level metagenome assembled genomes. We found no significant differences 
between alpha diversity or the abundance of specific microbial taxa between 
genotypes. However, IBV vaccination was found to correlate with significant 
differences in the richness and beta diversity of the microbiota, and to the 
abundance of 40 bacterial genera. In conclusion, we found that a lack of XCR1 
was not correlated with significant changes in the chicken microbiota, but IBV 
vaccination was.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.001289
PMCID: PMC11541229
PMID: 39222347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.

1. Discov Oncol. 2024 Aug 31;15(1):389. doi: 10.1007/s12672-024-01285-6.

Impact the impact of gut microbiota on gastric cancer via immune cells: a 
comprehensive Mendelian randomization study and mediation analysis.

Wang C(#)(1)(2), Wang J(#)(2), Guan W(3), Fei B(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan 
University, Wuxi, 214062, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Wuxi School of Medicine, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Division of Gastric Surgery, Department of General Surgery, Nanjing Drum 
Tower Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Medical School, Nanjing University, 
Nanjing, 210008, China. wenxian_guan820@sina.com.
(4)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangnan 
University, Wuxi, 214062, Jiangsu, China. jdfyfbj1971@163.com.
(5)Wuxi School of Medicine, Jiangnan University, Wuxi, 214122, Jiangsu, China. 
jdfyfbj1971@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Recent observational studies have highlighted the role of altered gut 
microbiota (GM) in the activation of the host immune system and the resulting of 
gastric cancer (GC). However, the exact causal relationship and mechanisms of 
action are still not fully understood.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genetic data from published genome-wide association 
studies (GWASs) were employed to determine the causal effects of 207 taxa and 
205 bacterial pathways on GC via two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) and 
two-step mediation MR analysis. In this study, 731 immune cell traits served as 
potential mediators. An inverse variance-weighted (IVW) estimation, augmented by 
a range of alternative estimators, notably the Bayesian-weighted MR method, was 
employed as the primary methodological approach.
RESULTS: Four taxa and five bacterial pathways were found to be negatively 
correlated with GC, whereas one taxon and two bacterial pathways were a 
positively correlated with GC. Reverse causality was not found in the reverse MR 
analysis. Additional validation was performed using a sensitivity analysis. 
Mediation MR analyses revealed that the GM influences GC through various 
phenotypes of 16 immune cells that act as mediators. For example, 
s_Alistipes_sp_AP11 was found to inhibit GC through NKT %T cell (total effect: 
-0.3234, mediation effect: 0.0212). This mediating effect further highlights the 
complex relationship among GMs, immune cell traits, and their combined effects 
on GC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the genetic connection between specific GMs 
and GC, emphasizing the potential role of immune cells as mediators, and 
offering valuable perspectives on potential therapeutic strategies that 
manipulating the GM to address GC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12672-024-01285-6
PMCID: PMC11365895
PMID: 39215888

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. mBio. 2024 Oct 16;15(10):e0206324. doi: 10.1128/mbio.02063-24. Epub 2024 Aug
29.

Metagenomic discovery of microbial eukaryotes in stool microbiomes.

Crouch AL(1), Monsey L(1), Rambeau M(1), Ramos C(1), Yracheta JM(2), Anderson 
MZ(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Native BioData Consortium, Eagle Butte, South Dakota, USA.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Center for Genomic Science Innovation, University of Wisconsin - Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Host-associated microbiota form complex microbial communities that are 
increasingly associated with host behavior and disease. While these microbes 
include bacterial, archaeal, viral, and eukaryotic constituents, most studies 
have focused on bacteria due to their dominance in the human host and available 
tools for investigation. Accumulating evidence suggests microbial eukaryotes in 
the microbiome play pivotal roles in host health, but our understandings of 
these interactions are limited to a few readily identifiable taxa because of 
technical limitations in unbiased eukaryote exploration. Here, we combined cell 
sorting, optimized eukaryotic cell lysis, and shotgun sequencing to accelerate 
metagenomic discovery and analysis of host-associated microbial eukaryotes. 
Using synthetic communities with a 1% microbial eukaryote representation, the 
eukaryote-optimized cell lysis and DNA recovery method alone yielded a 38-fold 
increase in eukaryotic DNA. Automated sorting of eukaryotic cells from stool 
samples of healthy adults increased the number of microbial eukaryote reads in 
metagenomic pools by up to 28-fold compared to commercial kits. Read frequencies 
for identified fungi increased by 10,000× on average compared to the Human 
Microbiome Project and allowed for the identification of novel taxa, de novo 
assembly of contigs from previously unknown microbial eukaryotes, and gene 
prediction from recovered genomic segments. These advances pave the way for the 
unbiased inclusion of microbial eukaryotes in deciphering determinants of health 
and disease in the host-associated microbiome.IMPORTANCEMicrobial eukaryotes are 
common constituents of the human gut where they can contribute to local ecology 
and host health, but they are often overlooked in microbiome studies. The lack 
of attention is due to current technical limitations that are heavily biased or 
poorly recovered DNA from microbial eukaryotes. We developed a method to 
increase the representation of these eukaryotes in metagenomic sequencing of 
microbiome samples that allows to improve their detection compared to prior 
methods and allows for the identification of new species. Application of the 
technique to gut microbiome samples improved detection of fungi, protists, and 
helminths. New eukaryotic taxa and their encoded genes could be identified by 
sequencing a small number of samples. This approach can improve the inclusion of 
eukaryotes into microbiome research.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.02063-24
PMCID: PMC11481512
PMID: 39207108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.Z.A. is a board member of the Native BioData 
Consortium.

1. Animals (Basel). 2024 Aug 20;14(16):2415. doi: 10.3390/ani14162415.

Effect of Dietary Restriction on Gut Microbiota and Brain-Gut Short Neuropeptide 
F in Mud Crab, Scylla paramamosain.

Bao C(1), Yang Y(1), Ye H(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Marine Sciences, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315832, China.
(2)School of Fisheries, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, China.

Aquatic animals frequently undergo feed deprivation and starvation stress. It is 
well-known that the gut microbiota and the gut-brain short neuropeptide F (sNPF) 
play essential roles in diet restriction. Therefore, investigating the responses 
of the gut microbiota and sNPF can enhance our understanding of physiological 
adaptations to feed deprivation and starvation stress. In this study, we 
examined the alterations in the gut microbiota of juvenile mud crabs under feed 
deprivation and starvation conditions. The results reveal differences in the 
richness and diversity of gut microbiota among the satisfied, half food, and 
starvation groups. Moreover, the microbial composition was affected by 
starvation stress, and more than 30 bacterial taxa exhibited significantly 
different abundances among the three feeding conditions. These results indicate 
that the diversity and composition of the gut microbiota are influenced by diet 
restriction, potentially involving interactions with the gut-brain sNPF. 
Subsequently, we detected the location of sNPF in the brains and guts of mud 
crabs through immunofluorescence and investigated the expression profile of sNPF 
under different feeding conditions. The results suggest that sNPF is located in 
both the brains and guts of mud crabs and shows increased expression levels 
among different degrees of diet restriction during a 96 h period. This study 
suggested a potential role for sNPF in regulating digestive activities and 
immunity through interactions with the gut microbiota. In conclusion, these 
findings significantly contribute to our understanding of the dynamic changes in 
gut microbiota and sNPF, highlighting their interplay in response to diet 
restriction.

DOI: 10.3390/ani14162415
PMCID: PMC11350653
PMID: 39199949

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Oxf Open Immunol. 2024 Jul 24;5(1):iqae008. doi: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqae008. 
eCollection 2024.

The gut-lung axis: the impact of the gut mycobiome on pulmonary diseases and 
infections.

Sey EA(1), Warris A(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Medical Mycology, University of Exeter, 
Exeter, EX4 4QD, UK.

The gastrointestinal tract contains a diverse microbiome consisting of bacteria, 
fungi, viruses and archaea. Although these microbes usually reside as commensal 
organisms, it is now well established that higher abundance of specific 
bacterial or fungal species, or loss of diversity in the microbiome can 
significantly affect development, progression and outcomes in disease. Studies 
have mainly focused on the effects of bacteria, however, the impact of other 
microbes, such as fungi, has received increased attention in the last few years. 
Fungi only represent around 0.1% of the total gut microbial population. However, 
key fungal taxa such as Candida, Aspergillus and Wallemia have been shown to 
significantly impact health and disease. The composition of the gut mycobiome 
has been shown to affect immunity at distal sites, such as the heart, lung, 
brain, pancreas, and liver. In the case of the lung this phenomenon is referred 
to as the 'gut-lung axis'. Recent studies have begun to explore and unveil the 
relationship between gut fungi and lung immunity in diseases such as asthma and 
lung cancer, and lung infections caused by viruses, bacteria and fungi. In this 
review we will summarize the current, rapidly growing, literature describing the 
impact of the gut mycobiome on respiratory disease and infection.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfimm/iqae008
PMCID: PMC11316619
PMID: 39193472

1. BMC Oral Health. 2024 Aug 26;24(1):1001. doi: 10.1186/s12903-024-04675-y.

Assessing peri-implant bacterial community structure: the effect of microbiome 
sample collection method.

Anitua E(1)(2), Murias-Freijo A(#)(3)(4), Tierno R(#)(5)(3), Tejero R(5)(3), 
Alkhraisat MH(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)BTI-Biotechnology Institute, Vitoria, Spain. 
eduardo@fundacioneduardoanitua.org.
(2)University Institute for Regenerative Medicine & Oral Implantology, UIRMI 
(UPV/EHU-Fundación Eduardo Anitua), Jacinto Quincoces, 39, Vitoria (Álava), 
01007, Spain. eduardo@fundacioneduardoanitua.org.
(3)University Institute for Regenerative Medicine & Oral Implantology, UIRMI 
(UPV/EHU-Fundación Eduardo Anitua), Jacinto Quincoces, 39, Vitoria (Álava), 
01007, Spain.
(4)Biomedical Investigation, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain.
(5)BTI-Biotechnology Institute, Vitoria, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Oral microbiota comprises polymicrobial communities shaped by 
mutualistic coevolution with the host, contributing to homeostasis and 
regulating immune function. Nevertheless, dysbiosis of oral bacterial 
communities is associated with a number of clinical symptoms that ranges from 
infections to oral cancer. Peri-implant diseases are biofilm-associated 
inflammatory conditions affecting the soft and hard tissues around dental 
implants. Characterization and identification of the biofilm community are 
essential for the understanding of the pathophysiology of such diseases. For 
that sampling methods should be representative of the biofilm communities 
Therefore, there is a need to know the effect of different sampling strategies 
on the biofilm characterization by next generation sequencing.
METHODS: With the aim of selecting an appropriate microbiome sampling procedure 
for periimplant biofilms, next generation sequencing was used for characterizing 
the bacterial communities obtained by three different sampling strategies two 
months after transepithelial abutment placement: adjacent periodontal crevicular 
fluid (ToCF), crevicular fluid from transepithelial abutment (TACF) and 
transepithelial abutment (TA).
RESULTS: Significant differences in multiple alpha diversity indices were 
detected at both the OTU and the genus level between different sampling 
procedures. Differentially abundant taxa were detected between sample collection 
strategies, including peri-implant health and disease related taxa. At the 
community level significant differences were also detected between TACF and TA 
and also between TA and ToCF. Moreover, differential network properties and 
association patterns were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The selection of sample collection strategy can significantly 
affect the community composition and structure.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: This research is part of a randomized clinical trial that 
was designed to assess the effect of transepithelial abutment surface on the 
biofilm formation. The trial was registered at Trial Registration 
ClinicalTrials.gov under the number NCT03554876.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-024-04675-y
PMCID: PMC11348724
PMID: 39187802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Anitua reports other from BTI Biotechnology 
Institute, during the conduct of the study. Other from BTI Biotechnology 
Institute, outside the submitted work. In addition, Dr. Anitua has a patent 
US8123524B2 issued to BTI Biotechnology Institute. Dr. Murias-Friejo has nothing 
to disclose. Dr. Tierno reports personal fees from BTI Biotechnology Institute, 
during the conduct of the study. Personal fees from BTI Biotechnology Institute, 
outside the submitted work. Dr. Tejero reports personal fees from BTI 
Biotechnology Institute, during the conduct of the study. Personal fees from BTI 
Biotechnology Institute, outside the submitted work. Dr. Alkhraisat reports 
personal fees from BTI Biotechnology Institute, during the conduct of the study. 
Personal fees from BTI Biotechnology Institute, outside the submitted work.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Oct 3;12(10):e0094424. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.00944-24. 
Epub 2024 Aug 20.

Dynamic interplay of immune response, metabolome, and microbiota in cows during 
high-grain feeding: insights from multi-omics analysis.

Castillo-Lopez E(#)(1)(2), Ricci S(#)(1)(2), Rivera-Chacon R(1)(2), 
Sener-Aydemir A(1), Pacífico C(3)(4), Reisinger N(5), Schwartz-Zimmermann 
HE(2)(6), Berthiller F(2)(6), Kreuzer-Redmer S(1), Zebeli Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Animal Nutrition and Welfare, Clinical Department for Farm Animals 
and Food System Science, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(2)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Innovative Gut Health Concepts of Livestock, 
Vienna, Austria.
(3)Biome Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Unit of Food Hygiene and Technology, Institute of Food Safety, Food 
Technology and Veterinary Public Health, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)dsm-firmenich, Animal Nutrition and Health R&D Center, Tulln, Austria.
(6)Department of Agrobiotechnology (IFA-Tulln), Institute of Bioanalytics and 
Agro-Metabolomics, University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, 
Austria.
(#)Contributed equally

This study explores the dynamics of immune gene expression, ruminal metabolome, 
and gut microbiota in cows due to the duration of high-grain feeding, shedding 
light on host response and microbial dynamics in parallel. Cows consumed forage 
for a week, then gradually transitioned to a high-grain diet, which they 
consumed for 4 weeks. Immune response was evaluated in ruminal papillae by 
expression of genes related to the nuclear factor-kappaB (NFkB) pathway and 
correlated with the microbiota. Rumen metabolome was evaluated with 
high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry and 
anion-exchange chromatography. Rumen and fecal microbiota were evaluated with 
16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing. In the rumen, expression of 
inflammation-associated genes increased with the duration on high grain, 
indicating activation of pro-inflammatory cascades; microbial diversity 
decreased with a high-grain diet but stabilized after week 3 on high grain. 
Changes in microbial relative abundance and metabolite enrichment were observed 
throughout the 4 weeks on high grain, with increments in propionogenic taxa 
(i.e., Succinivibrionaceae). Metabolite enrichment analysis showed that at the 
start of high-grain feeding, simple carbohydrates were enriched; then, these 
were substituted by their fermentation products. There were correlations between 
certain ruminal bacterial taxa (i.e., Ruminococcaceae UCG-005) and expression of 
genes of the NFkB pathway, suggesting the influence of these taxa on host immune 
response. In feces, microbial diversity and several Ruminococcaceae members 
initially declined but recovered by weeks 3 and 4. Overall, despite the 
stabilization of microbial diversity, changes in microbial relative abundance 
and proinflammatory genes were observed throughout high-grain feeding, 
suggesting that cows need more than 4 weeks to fully adjust once consuming a 
high-grain diet.IMPORTANCEDespite the stepwise diet transition typically assumed 
to serve for animal adaptation, expression of signaling receptors, mediators, 
and downstream targets of nuclear factor-kappaB pathway were found throughout 
the 4 weeks on high grain, which correlated with changes in the rumen microbial 
profile. In addition, although microbial diversity recovered in the feces and 
stabilized in the rumen in week 3 on high grain, we observed changes in 
microbial relative abundance throughout the 4 weeks on high grain, suggesting 
that cows need more than 4 weeks to adjust once consuming this diet. Findings 
are particularly important to consider when planning experiments involving 
dietary changes.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.00944-24
PMCID: PMC11448160
PMID: 39162517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. iScience. 2024 Jul 5;27(8):110456. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.110456.
eCollection  2024 Aug 16.

Plasma endocannabinoidome and fecal microbiota interplay in people with HIV and 
subclinical coronary artery disease: Results from the Canadian HIV and Aging 
Cohort Study.

Mboumba Bouassa RS(1)(2), Giorgini G(3), Silvestri C(3)(4), Muller C(3), 
Nallabelli N(3), Alexandrova Y(1), Durand M(5), Tremblay C(5), El-Far M(5), 
Chartrand-Lefebvre C(5), Messier-Peet M(5), Margolese S(6), Flamand N(3), 
Costiniuk CT(2)(7), Di Marzo V(3)(4)(8), Jenabian MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences and CERMO-FC Research Centre, Université du 
Quebec à Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Infectious Diseases and Immunity in Global Health Program, Research Institute 
of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Research Center of the Institut Universitaire de Cardiologie et Pneumologie 
de Québec (CRIUCPQ), Université Laval.
(4)Institut sur la Nutrition et les Aliments Fonctionnels (INAF) et Centre 
Nutrition, Santé et Société (NUTRISS), Université Laval, Québec City, QC, 
Canada.
(5)Centre de recherche du CHUM, Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(6)CIHR Canadian HIV Trials Network (CTN), Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases/Chronic Viral Illness Service, McGill 
University Health Centre, Royal Victoria Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(8)Canada Excellence Research Chair on the Microbiome-Endocannabinoidome Axis in 
Metabolic Health, Université Laval.

Chronic HIV infection is associated with accelerated coronary artery disease 
(CAD) due to chronic inflammation. The expanded endocannabinoid system (eCBome) 
and gut microbiota modulate each other and are key regulators of cardiovascular 
functions and inflammation. We herein investigated the interplay between plasma 
eCBome mediators and gut microbiota in people with HIV (PWH) and/or subclinical 
CAD versus HIV-uninfected individuals. CAD was determined by coronary computed 
tomography (CT) angiography performed on all participants. Plasma eCBome 
mediator and fecal microbiota composition were assessed by tandem mass 
spectrometry and 16S rDNA sequencing, respectively. HIV infection was associated 
with perturbed plasma eCBome mediators characterized by an inverse relationship 
between anandamide and N-acyl-ethanolamines (NAEs) versus 2-AG and 
2-monoacylglycerols (MAGs). Plasma triglyceride levels were positively 
associated with MAGs. Several fecal bacterial taxa were altered in HIV-CAD+ 
versus controls and correlated with plasma eCBome mediators. CAD-associated 
taxonomic alterations in fecal bacterial taxa were not found in PWH.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.110456
PMCID: PMC11326910
PMID: 39156649

Conflict of interest statement: We have no competing interest to declare.

1. Lupus. 2024 Oct;33(12):1373-1378. doi: 10.1177/09612033241274515. Epub 2024
Aug  17.

Gut microbiome composition and intestinal immunity in antiphospholipid syndrome 
patients versus healthy controls.

Jansen VL(1)(2)(3), Davids M(1), van Mourik DJ(1)(2)(4), Levels JH(1), Coppens 
M(1)(2), Middeldorp S(5), Nieuwdorp M(1), van Mens TE(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of (Experimental) Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam UMC Location 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Pulmonary Hypertension & Thrombosis, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam Reproduction & Development Research Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medicine - Thrombosis and Haemostasis, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.

INTRODUCTION: The gut microbiome is recognized as a factor that could 
potentially contribute to the persistent antibodies of antiphospholipid syndrome 
(APS). Gut microbial interventions can both induce and mitigate APS in mice. In 
human APS patients, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein I (β2GP-1) titers correlate with 
antibody titers against a gut commensal protein homologous to β2GP-1.
AIM: To  investigate the effect of the intestinal microenvironment on human APS. 
Methods We cross-sectionally compared intestinal microbiota composition 
quantified by shotgun sequencing; fecal short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), 
bacterial metabolites known to affect autoimmune processes; and fecal 
calprotectin, an intestinal inflammatory marker, in APS patients and healthy 
controls.
RESULTS: Neither alpha nor beta diversity of the gut microbiota differed between 
APS patients (n = 15) and controls (n = 16) and no taxa were differentially 
abundant. Moreover, fecal SCFAs and fecal calprotectin, did not differ between 
the groups.
CONCLUSION: Gut microbiome effects on the APS phenotype are likely not driven by 
bacterial overabundance, SCFA production or intestinal inflammation.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033241274515
PMCID: PMC11443740
PMID: 39152759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: M.C. has received 
financial support for research from Bayer, CSL Behring, Roche, UniQure, and Novo 
Nordisk; honoraria for consulting or lecturing from Alexion, Bayer, CSL Behring, 
Sobi, and Viatris S.M. reports grants from GSK and Aspen; grants and personal 
fees from Daiichi-Sankyo, Bayer, Pfizer, and Boehringer Ingelheim; and personal 
fees from Portola/Alexion, AbbVie, Pfizer/Bristol-Meyers Squibb, Norgine, 
Viatris, and Sanofi, outside of the submitted work. M.N. is scientific advisor 
of Caelus Health, however this is not relevant for the content of the current 
paper.

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2024 Aug 10:rs.3.rs-4720457. doi: 
10.21203/rs.3.rs-4720457/v1.

HIV Infection and Exposure Increases Cariogenic Taxa, Reduces Taxonomic 
Turnover, and Homogenizes Spatial Differentiation for the Supragingival 
Microbiome.

Mann AE(1), Aumend C(2), Crull S(2), O'Connell LM(2), Osagie E(3), Akhigbe P(3), 
Obuekwe O(4), Omoigberale A(4), Rowe M(2), Blouin T(2), Soule A(2), Kelly C(2), 
Burne RA(5), Coker MO(6), Richards VP(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Wyoming.
(2)Clemson University.
(3)Institute of Human Virology.
(4)University of Benin Teaching Hospital.
(5)University of Florida.
(6)Rutgers University.

BACKGROUND: The oral microbiome comprises distinct microbial communities that 
colonize diverse ecological niches across the oral cavity, the composition of 
which are influenced by nutrient and substrate availability, host genetics, 
diet, behavior, age, and other diverse host and environmental factors. Unlike 
other densely populated human-associated microbial ecosystems (e.g., gut, 
urogenital), the oral microbiome is regularly and directly exposed to the 
external environment and is therefore likely less stable over time. Cross 
sectional studies of the oral microbiome capture a glimpse of this temporal 
dynamism, yet a full appreciation of the relative stability, robusticity, and 
spatial structure of the oral environment is necessary to understand the role of 
microbial communities in promoting health or disease.
RESULTS: Here we investigate the spatial and temporal stability of the oral 
microbiome over three sampling time points in the context of HIV infection and 
exposure. Individual teeth were sampled from a cohort of 565 Nigerian children 
with varying levels of tooth decay severity (i.e., caries disease). We collected 
1,960 supragingival plaque samples and characterized the oral microbiome using a 
metataxonomic approach targeting an approximately 478 bp region of the bacterial 
rpoC gene. We found that both infection and exposure to HIV have significant 
effects on the stability of the supragingival plaque microbiome at both the 
spatial and temporal scale. Specifically, we detect (1) significantly lower 
taxonomic turnover of the oral community among exposed and infected children 
compared to unexposed children, (2) we find that HIV infection homogenizes the 
oral community across the anterior and posterior dentition, and (3) that 
impaired immunity (i.e., low CD4 count) and low taxonomic turnover over time in 
children living with HIV is associated with higher frequency of cariogenic taxa 
including Streptococcus mutans.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results document substantial community fluctuations over time 
in children unexposed to HIV independent of oral health status. This suggests 
that the oral community, under typical conditions, rapidly adapts to 
environmental perturbations to maintain homeostasis and that long-term taxonomic 
rigidity is a signal of community dysfunction, potentially leading to a higher 
incidence of oral disease including caries.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4720457/v1
PMCID: PMC11326420
PMID: 39149457

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests Additional Declarations: No competing interests 
reported.

1. J Infect. 2024 Oct;89(4):106243. doi: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106243. Epub 2024
Aug  12.

Exposure to doxycycline increases risk of carrying a broad range of enteric 
antimicrobial resistance determinants in an elderly cohort.

Carpenter L(1), Miller S(1), Flynn E(2), Choo JM(1), Collins J(3), Shoubridge 
AP(1), Gordon D(4), Lynn DJ(5), Whitehead C(6), Leong LEX(7), Ivey KL(8), 
Wesselingh SL(9), Inacio MC(10), Crotty M(6), Papanicolas LE(11), Taylor SL(1), 
Rogers GB(12).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome and Host Health Program, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Infection and Immunity, Flinders 
Health and Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine and Public Health, 
Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia.
(2)Microbiome and Host Health Program, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia; SA Pathology, SA Health, Adelaide, 
SA, Australia.
(3)Microbiome and Host Health Program, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(4)SA Pathology, SA Health, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Department of Microbiology 
and Infectious Diseases, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA, Australia.
(5)Infection and Immunity, Flinders Health and Medical Research Institute, 
College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, 
Australia; Computational & Systems Biology Program, South Australian Health and 
Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)Department of Rehabilitation, Aged and Palliative Care, Flinders Medical 
Centre, Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia; Registry of Senior 
Australians, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, 
SA, Australia.
(7)SA Pathology, SA Health, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(8)Division of Aging, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, MA, United States; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, United States.
(9)Microbiome and Host Health Program, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Infection and Immunity, Flinders 
Health and Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine and Public Health, 
Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia; Registry of Senior 
Australians, South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, 
SA, Australia.
(10)Registry of Senior Australians, South Australian Health and Medical Research 
Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Allied Health and Human Performance, 
University of South Australia, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(11)Microbiome and Host Health Program, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Infection and Immunity, Flinders 
Health and Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine and Public Health, 
Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia; SA Pathology, SA Health, 
Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(12)Microbiome and Host Health Program, South Australian Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, SA, Australia; Infection and Immunity, Flinders 
Health and Medical Research Institute, College of Medicine and Public Health, 
Flinders University, Bedford Park, SA, Australia. Electronic address: 
geraint.rogers@sahmri.com.

OBJECTIVES: High rates of antibiotic prescription in residential aged care are 
likely to promote enteric carriage of antibiotic-resistant pathogens and 
increase the risk of antibiotic treatment failure. Despite their importance, 
relationships between antibiotic exposures and patterns of enteric resistance 
carriage in this population remain poorly understood.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional metagenomic cohort analysis of stool 
samples from residents of five long-term aged-care facilities in South 
Australia. Taxonomic composition was determined, and enteric carriage of 
antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) was identified and quantified against the 
Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database. Both the detection and abundance 
of stool taxa and ARGs were related to antibiotic exposures up to 12 months 
prior. Factors associated with the abundance of ARGs of high clinical concern 
were identified.
RESULTS: Stool samples were provided by 164 participants (median age: 88 years, 
IQR 81-93; 72% female). Sixty-one percent (n = 100) of participants were 
prescribed antibiotics at least once in the prior 12 months (median 
prescriptions: 4, range: 1-52), most commonly a penicillin (n = 55, 33.5%), 
cephalosporin (n = 53, 32.3%), diaminopyrimidine (trimethoprim) (n = 36, 22%), 
or tetracycline (doxycycline) (n = 21, 12.8%). More than 1100 unique ARGs, 
conferring resistance to 38 antibiotic classes, were identified, including 20 
ARGs of high clinical concern. Multivariate logistic regression showed 
doxycycline exposure to be the greatest risk factor for high ARG abundance 
(adjusted odds ratio [aOR]=14.8, q<0.001) and a significant contributor to 
inter-class selection, particularly for ARGs relating to penicillins (aOR=3.1, 
q=0.0004) and cephalosporins (aOR=3.4, q=0.003). High enteric ARG abundance was 
associated with the number of separate antibiotic exposures (aOR: 6.4, q<0.001), 
exposures within the prior 30 days (aOR: 4.6, q=0.008) and prior 30-100 days 
(aOR: 2.6, q=0.008), high duration of antibiotic exposure (aOR: 7.9, q<0.001), 
and exposure to 3 or more antibiotic classes (aOR: 7.4, q<0.001). Carriage of 
one or more ARGs of high clinical concern was identified in 99% of participants 
(n = 162, median: 3, IQR: 2-4), involving 11 ARGs conferring resistance to 
aminoglycosides, four to beta-lactams, one to glycopeptides, three to 
fluoroquinolones, and one to oxazolidinones. Carriage of ARGs of high clinical 
concern was positively associated with exposure to doxycycline (aminoglycoside, 
fluoroquinolone, and oxazolidinone ARGs) and trimethoprim (fluoroquinolone and 
beta-lactam ARGs). Analysis of doxycycline impact on microbiota composition 
suggested that observed resistome changes arose principally through direct ARG 
selection, rather than through the antibiotic depletion of sensitive bacterial 
populations.
CONCLUSIONS: The gut microbiome of aged care residents is a major reservoir of 
antibiotic resistance. As a critical antibiotic in medical practice, a 
comprehensive understanding of the impact of doxycycline exposure on the gut 
resistome is paramount for informed antibiotic use, particularly in an evolving 
landscape of prophylactic applications. Near-universal asymptomatic carriage of 
clinically critical resistance determinants is highly concerning and reinforces 
the urgent need for improved management of antibiotic use in long-term aged 
care.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jinf.2024.106243
PMID: 39142392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no competing interests, nor any financial or personal 
relationships with other people or organisations that could bias this study.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Jul 29;15:1409729. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1409729. 
eCollection 2024.

Shifts in the gut microbiota of sea urchin Diadema antillarum associated with 
the 2022 disease outbreak.

Ruiz-Barrionuevo JM(1)(2), Kardas E(3)(4), Rodríguez-Barreras R(5)(6), 
Quiñones-Otero MA(7)(8), Ruiz-Diaz CP(8), Toledo-Hernández C(8), Godoy-Vitorino 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Ecología Regional (IER), Universidad Nacional de Tucumán 
(UNT)-Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
Tucumán, Argentina.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias Naturales e Instituto Miguel Lillo, Universidad Nacional 
de Tucumán (UNT), Tucumán, Argentina.
(3)Department of Microbiology, University of Puerto Rico, School of Medicine, 
San Juan, PR, United States.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Rio Piedras campus, San 
Juan, PR, United States.
(5)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico, Mayagüez campus, Mayagüez, 
PR, United States.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Puerto Rico at Bayamón, Bayamón, PR, 
United States.
(7)Planning Department, University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus, San Juan, 
PR, United States.
(8)Sociedad Ambiente Marino, San Juan, PR, United States.

INTRODUCTION: In recent decades, Caribbean coral reefs have lost many vital 
marine species due to diseases. The well-documented mass mortality event of the 
long-spined black sea urchin Diadema antillarum in the early 1980s stands out 
among these collapses. This die-off killed over 90% of D. antillarum changing 
the reefscape from coral to algal-dominated. Nearly 40 years later, D. 
antillarum populations have yet to recover. In early 2022, a new mortality event 
of D. antillarum was reported along the Caribbean, including Puerto Rico.
METHODS: This study identifies the gut microbiota changes associated with the D. 
antillarum during this mortality event. It contrasts them with the bacterial 
composition of gut samples from healthy individuals collected in 2019 by using 
16S rRNA sequencing analyses.
RESULTS: Notably, the die-off group's core microbiome resembled bacteria 
commonly found in the human skin and gut, suggesting potential anthropogenic 
contamination and wastewater pollution as contributing factors to the 2022 
dysbiosis. The animals collected in 2022, especially those with signs of 
disease, lacked keystone taxa normally found in Diadema including Photobacterium 
and Propionigenium.
DISCUSSION: The association between human microbes and disease stages in the 
long-spined urchin D. antillarum, especially in relation to anthropogenic 
contamination, highlights a complex interplay between environmental stressors 
and marine health. While these microbes might not be the direct cause of death 
in this species of sea urchins, their presence and proliferation can indicate 
underlying issues, such as immune depletion due to pollution, habitat 
destruction, or climate change, that ultimately compromise the health of these 
marine organisms.

Copyright © 2024 Ruiz-Barrionuevo, Kardas, Rodríguez-Barreras, Quiñones-Otero, 
Ruiz-Diaz, Toledo-Hernández and Godoy-Vitorino.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1409729
PMCID: PMC11317302
PMID: 39135877

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 27;25(15):8223. doi: 10.3390/ijms25158223.

The Role of the Gut and Airway Microbiota in Chronic Rhinosinusitis with Nasal 
Polyps: A Systematic Review.

Gómez-García M(1)(2), Moreno-Jimenez E(1)(3), Morgado N(1)(4), García-Sánchez 
A(1)(4)(5), Gil-Melcón M(1)(6), Pérez-Pazos J(1)(2)(7), Estravís M(1)(5), 
Isidoro-García M(1)(2)(5)(8), Dávila I(1)(4)(5)(9), Sanz C(1)(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), 37007 Salamanca, 
Spain.
(2)Pharmacogenetics and Precision Medicine Unit, Clinical Biochemistry 
Department, University Hospital of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Salamanca, 37007 
Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Biomedical and Diagnostics Sciences Department, University of Salamanca, 
37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Results-Oriented Cooperative Research Networks in Health-Red de Enfermedades 
Inflamatorias, Carlos III Health Institute, 28220 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery Department, University Hospital 
of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(7)Centre for Networked Biomedical Research in Cardiovascular Diseases 
(CIBERCV), Carlos III Health Institute, 28220 Madrid, Spain.
(8)Medicine Department, University of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, Spain.
(9)Department of Allergy, University Hospital of Salamanca, 37007 Salamanca, 
Spain.

In recent years, there has been growing interest in understanding the potential 
role of microbiota dysbiosis or alterations in the composition and function of 
human microbiota in the development of chronic rhinosinusitis with nasal 
polyposis (CRSwNP). This systematic review evaluated the literature on CRSwNP 
and host microbiota for the last ten years, including mainly nasal bacteria, 
viruses, and fungi, following the PRISMA guidelines and using the major 
scientific publication databases. Seventy original papers, mainly from Asia and 
Europe, met the inclusion criteria, providing a comprehensive overview of the 
microbiota composition in CRSwNP patients and its implications for inflammatory 
processes in nasal polyps. This review also explores the potential impact of 
microbiota-modulating therapies for the CRSwNP treatment. Despite variability in 
study populations and methodologies, findings suggest that fluctuations in 
specific taxa abundance and reduced bacterial diversity can be accepted as 
critical factors influencing the onset or severity of CRSwNP. These microbiota 
alterations appear to be implicated in triggering cell-mediated immune 
responses, cytokine cascade changes, and defects in the epithelial barrier. 
Although further human studies are required, microbiota-modulating strategies 
could become integral to future combined CRSwNP treatments, complementing 
current therapies that mainly target inflammatory mediators and potentially 
improving patient outcomes.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25158223
PMCID: PMC11311313
PMID: 39125792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.G.-S. has received payment for lectures from 
Leti. M.E. has received payment for lectures from SANOFI in the last three 
years. M.G.-M. has received payment for lectures from Astra-Zeneca, GSK, and 
Sanofi. I.D. has received payment for lectures, including service on speaker’s 
bureaus from Allergy Therapeutics, Astra-Zeneca, Chiesi, Diater, GSK, Leti, 
Novartis, and Sanofi; for a consultancy from Allergy Therapeutics, ALK-Abello, 
Astra-Zeneca, GSK, Merck, MSD, Novartis, and Sanofi; and grants for Thermofisher 
Diagnostics. The rest of the authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the study’s design, in the collection, analysis, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.

1. Nutrients. 2024 Jul 23;16(15):2382. doi: 10.3390/nu16152382.

Harnessing the Gut Microbiome: To What Extent Can Pre-/Probiotics Alleviate 
Immune Activation in Autism Spectrum Disorder?

Wu Y(1)(2), Su Q(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota I-Center (MagIC), Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.

Children diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) are at an increased risk 
of experiencing gastrointestinal (GI) discomfort, which has been linked to 
dysfunctions in the microbiome-gut-brain axis. The bidirectional communication 
between gut and brain plays a crucial role in the overall health of individuals, 
and alterations in the gut microbiome can contribute to immune activation and 
gut-brain dysfunction in ASD. Despite the limited and controversial results of 
pre-/probiotic applications in ASD, this review comprehensively maps the 
association between ASD clinical symptoms and specific bacterial taxa and 
evaluates the efficacy of pre-/probiotics in modulating microbiota composition, 
reducing inflammatory biomarkers, alleviating difficulties in GI distress, sleep 
problems, core and other ASD-associated symptoms, as well as relieving parental 
concerns, separately, in individuals with ASD. Beyond simply targeting core ASD 
symptoms, this review highlights the potential of pre-/probiotic 
supplementations as a strategy to modulate gut homeostasis and immune response, 
and to delineate the potential mechanisms by which its direct or mediating 
effects can alleviate gut-brain dysfunction and poor nutritional status in ASD 
management. Further well-designed randomized controlled trials are needed to 
strengthen the existing evidence and establish optimal protocols for the use of 
pre-/probiotics in the context of ASD.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16152382
PMCID: PMC11314583
PMID: 39125263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2024 Oct;153:109819. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2024.109819. 
Epub 2024 Aug 8.

The phytoplankton community affects the energy metabolism and immunomodulation 
strategy of oyster during breeding seasons.

Liu Z(1), Kong N(2), Zhang Y(3), Zheng Y(3), Yang C(4), Fu Q(3), Zhang Z(3), Li 
F(3), Liu R(3), Wang L(5), Song L(6).

Author information:
(1)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), 
Zhuhai, 519000, China; Liaoning Key Laboratory of Marine Animal Immunology and 
Disease Control, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China; Functional 
Laboratory of Marine Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao 
National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266235, China; 
Dalian Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Disease Prevention and Control, Dalian 
Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China.
(2)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), 
Zhuhai, 519000, China; Liaoning Key Laboratory of Marine Animal Immunology and 
Disease Control, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China.
(3)Liaoning Key Laboratory of Marine Animal Immunology and Disease Control, 
Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China; Dalian Key Laboratory of Aquatic 
Animal Disease Prevention and Control, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, 
China.
(4)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), 
Zhuhai, 519000, China; Functional Laboratory of Marine Fisheries Science and 
Food Production Processes, Qingdao National Laboratory for Marine Science and 
Technology, Qingdao, 266235, China; Dalian Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal 
Disease Prevention and Control, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China.
(5)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), 
Zhuhai, 519000, China; Liaoning Key Laboratory of Marine Animal Immunology and 
Disease Control, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China; Functional 
Laboratory of Marine Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao 
National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266235, China; 
Dalian Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Disease Prevention and Control, Dalian 
Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China. Electronic address: 
wanglingling@dlou.edu.cn.
(6)Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai), 
Zhuhai, 519000, China; Liaoning Key Laboratory of Marine Animal Immunology and 
Disease Control, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China; Functional 
Laboratory of Marine Fisheries Science and Food Production Processes, Qingdao 
National Laboratory for Marine Science and Technology, Qingdao, 266235, China; 
Dalian Key Laboratory of Aquatic Animal Disease Prevention and Control, Dalian 
Ocean University, Dalian, 116023, China. Electronic address: 
lshsong@dlou.edu.cn.

The mass mortality of Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas has become a severe 
ecological and economic concern to Chinese aquaculture, which is proposed to be 
linked to the phytoplankton community in the farming waters. In the present 
study, both field and laboratory experiments were conducted to identify the 
phytoplankton taxa associated with oyster mortality and explore the molecular 
mechanism by which they affect the physiological health of oysters. The field 
experiment showed that more serious mortality of oysters was observed in the 
North Yellow Sea from July to September in 2018 (average survival rate of 
75.11 %) than in 2019 (average survival rate of 85.78 %), with the proportion of 
Bacillariophyta (diatoms) in the phytoplankton community in 2018 lower than that 
in 2019. In comparison to 2019, reduced dry weight, lower glycogen and 
triglyceride contents in hepatopancreas, lower 17β-estradiol and testosterone 
concentrations in gonad, as well as a generally weaker immune response against 
Vibrio splendidus stimulation were detected in the oysters sampled in 2018. The 
treatment of oysters with either starvation (starvation group) or Nitzschia 
closterium f. minutissima feeding (N. closterium group) was conducted to verify 
the field findings, with individuals reared in natural seawater as control. 
After 40 days of N. closterium feeding, dry weight, glycogen and triglyceride 
contents in hepatopancreas significantly increased, as well as the biosynthesis 
of sex hormones and gonadal maturation were promoted compared to the control and 
starvation groups. Moreover, a much stronger immune response against V. 
splendidus stimulation was observed in the oysters of N. closterium group, with 
the fold-changes of norepinephrine content in serum, SOD activity in 
hepatopancreas, and the mRNA expression level of IL17-5 and HSP70 in haemocytes 
higher than those in the control and starvation groups. Collectively, these 
results suggested that lack of diatoms in the farming waters suppressed the 
energy storage and gonadal maturation of adult oysters, and also resulted in a 
compromised immune response against bacterial infection, which may be a leading 
cause of the mass mortality of oysters living in diatom-deficient waters during 
breeding seasons.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2024.109819
PMID: 39122097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests which may be perceived to influence the conduct 
or analysis of the data.

1. Mucosal Immunol. 2024 Oct;17(5):1089-1101. doi: 10.1016/j.mucimm.2024.07.008. 
Epub 2024 Jul 31.

Translocating bacteria in SIV infection are not stochastic and preferentially 
express cytosine methyltransferases.

Flynn JK(1), Ortiz AM(1), Vujkovic-Cvijin I(2), Welles HC(2), Simpson J(1), 
Castello Casta FM(1), Yee DS(1), Rahmberg AR(1), Brooks KL(1), De Leon M(3), 
Knodel S(3), Birse K(3), Noel-Romas L(3), Deewan A(4), Belkaid Y(5), Burgener 
A(6), Brenchley JM(7).

Author information:
(1)Barrier Immunity Section, Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, 
MD, USA.
(2)Metaorganism Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Immunity and Microbiome, 
NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA; Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada.
(4)Integrated Data Sciences Section, Research Technologies Branch, NIAID, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Metaorganism Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Immunity and Microbiome, 
NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA; Metaorganism Unit, Immunology Department, 
Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, France.
(6)Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH, USA; Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada; Department of Medicine Solna, Karolinksa 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Barrier Immunity Section, Laboratory of Viral Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, 
MD, USA. Electronic address: jbrenchl@mail.nih.gov.

Microbial translocation is a significant contributor to chronic inflammation in 
people living with HIV (PLWH) and is associated with increased mortality and 
morbidity in individuals treated for long periods with antiretrovirals. The use 
of therapeutics to treat microbial translocation has yielded mixed effects, in 
part, because the species and mechanisms contributing to translocation in HIV 
remain incompletely characterized. To characterize translocating bacteria, we 
cultured translocators from chronically SIV-infected rhesus macaques. Proteomic 
profiling of these bacteria identified cytosine-specific methyltransferases as a 
common feature and therefore, a potential driver of translocation. Treatment of 
translocating bacteria with the cytosine methyltransferase inhibitor decitabine 
significantly impaired growth for several species in vitro. In rhesus macaques, 
oral treatment with decitabine led to some transient decreases in translocator 
taxa in the gut microbiome. These data provide mechanistic insight into 
bacterial translocation in lentiviral infection and explore a novel therapeutic 
intervention that may improve the prognosis of PLWH.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mucimm.2024.07.008
PMCID: PMC11471372
PMID: 39089468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. mSystems. 2024 Aug 20;9(8):e0075424. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00754-24. Epub 2024
 Jul 31.

Prebiotic galactooligosaccharide feed modifies the chicken gut microbiota to 
efficiently clear Salmonella.

Richards PJ(1), Almutrafy A(1), Liang L(1), Flaujac Lafontaine GM(1), King E(1), 
Fish NM(2), Connerton AJ(1), Connerton PL(1), Connerton IF(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology, Brewing and Biotechnology, School of Biosciences, 
University of Nottingham, Loughborough, Leicestershire, United Kingdom.
(2)Saputo Dairy UK (c/o Simon Hunt), Saputo Dairy UK Innovation Centre, Harper 
Adams University, Edgmond, Newport, United Kingdom.

Chicken meat is contaminated with Salmonella from the gut of infected chickens 
during slaughter. Eradication of Salmonella from broiler chickens through 
hygiene measures and/or vaccination is not cost-effective; complementary 
approaches are required. A mature gut microbiota obstructs Salmonella infection 
in chickens, and deliberate fortification of colonization resistance through 
prebiotic feed formulations would benefit public health and poultry production. 
Prebiotic galactooligosaccharides hastens Salmonella clearance from the gut of 
infected chickens. To better understand the role of galactooligosaccharides in 
colonization resistance, broiler chickens were raised on a wheat-soybean 
meal-based feed, with or without galactooligosaccharides for the first 24 days 
of life. Chickens were orally challenged with Salmonella enterica serovar 
Enteritidis at 20 days and the effect of supplementary galactooligosaccharides 
characterized by profiling Salmonella colonization, gut microbiota, innate 
immune response, and cecal short-chain fatty acid concentrations. Exposure to 
dietary galactooligosaccharides shortened the time to clear S. Enteritidis from 
the ceca. Differential abundance analysis of the cecal microbiota associated 
Salmonella challenge with a bacterial taxon belonging to the Acidaminococcaceae 
family (P < 0.005). Increased cecal concentrations of the short-chain fatty 
acids propionate and valerate were measured in Salmonella-challenged chickens 
sustained on either control or galactooligosaccharide-supplemented feed relative 
to mock-challenged controls; but far greater concentrations were detected in 
chickens fed a galactooligosaccharide-supplemented diet in early life. The 
abundance of the Acidaminococcaceae taxon exhibited a positive correlation with 
the cecal concentrations of propionate (ρ = 0.724, P = 0.008) and valerate (ρ = 
0.71, P = 0.013). The absence of cecal pro-inflammatory transcriptional 
responses suggest that the rapid Salmonella clearance observed for the 
galactooligosaccharide-supplemented diet was not linked to innate immune 
function.
IMPORTANCE: Work presented here identifies bacterial taxa responsible for 
colonization resistance to Salmonella in broiler chickens. Deliberate 
cultivation of these taxa with prebiotic galactooligosaccharide has potential as 
a straight-forward, safe, and cost-effective intervention against Salmonella. We 
hypothesize that catabolism of galactooligosaccharide and its breakdown products 
by indigenous microorganisms colonizing the chicken gut produce excess levels of 
propionate. In the absence of gross inflammation, propionate is inimical to 
Salmonella and hastens intestinal clearance.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00754-24
PMCID: PMC11334501
PMID: 39082804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: N.M.F. was a consultant to Dairy Crest Ltd.

1. Poult Sci. 2024 Oct;103(10):104088. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.104088. Epub 2024 
Jul 10.

Effects of dietary Chitosan oligosaccharides supplementation on Th17/Treg 
balance and gut microbiota of early weaned pigeon squabs.

Zhao W(1), Jia Y(1), Li R(1), Li J(1), Zou X(1), Dong X(2).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory for Molecular Animal Nutrition (Zhejiang University) of the 
Ministry of Education, College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University 
(Zijingang Campus), Hangzhou 310058, China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Molecular Animal Nutrition (Zhejiang University) of the 
Ministry of Education, College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University 
(Zijingang Campus), Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address: 
sophiedxy@zju.edu.cn.

Our previous study found that early weaning is associated with decreased growth 
performance, intestinal barrier impairment, and an imbalance in Th17/Treg in 
pigeon squabs. Chitosan oligosaccharides (COS) has been substantiated to 
regulate gut microbiota and restore Th17/Treg equilibrium in mammals, thereby 
ameliorating growth performance. However, the potential effects of COS in 
altricial birds remain unclear. Three hundred healthy 7-day-old American king 
pigeon squabs were selected with similar body weights and randomly divided into 
5 groups. The 5 treatment groups were as follows: the control group (CON), fed 
with artificial pigeon milk; 4 supplementation groups, fed with artificial 
pigeon milk +100 (COS1), 150 (COS2), 200 (COS3), and 250 (COS4) mg/kg COS, 
respectively. Results showed that dietary supplementation of COS significantly 
enhanced the growth performance of weaned squabs. Compared to the CON group, the 
COS groups exhibited increased villus length and villus area in the jejunum and 
ileum, accompanied by improvements in morphological structure and mucosal 
permeability. COS was found to reduce the levels of Th17-associated cytokines 
and increase the levels of Treg-associated cytokines. COS downregulated the 
expression of retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor C (RORC), a key 
transcription factor of Th17 cells, while upregulated the expression of Forkhead 
box protein P3 (FOXP3), a key transcription factor of Treg cells. Dietary COS 
supplementation increased gut bacterial diversity, altered the relative 
abundance of several bacteria taxa and enhanced the concentration of short-chain 
fatty acids (SCFA). Correlation analysis demonstrated a close association 
between gut microbiota, SCFAs, and indicators related to the Th17/Treg balance. 
Moreover, we found that SCFAs correlated more strongly with Th17/Treg-related 
indexes than gut microbiota. These results demonstrated that COS could relieve 
early weaning stress in pigeon squabs and the optimal dosage of dietary COS 
supplementation was suggested to be 200 mg/kg. In addition, COS had a protective 
effect on maintaining intestinal immune balance by modulating microbiota and 
Th17/Treg related signaling pathways, in which SCFAs might play a crucial role 
as messengers.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.104088
PMCID: PMC11338107
PMID: 39067116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Jun 28;12(7):1323. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12071323.

Multiple Chitin- or Avirulent Strain-Triggered Immunity Induces Microbiome 
Reassembly in Rice.

Jibril SM(1)(2), Wang C(1)(2), Yang C(1)(2), Qu H(1)(2), Yang X(1)(2), Yang 
K(1)(2), Li C(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources in 
Yunnan, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China.
(2)Yunnan-CABI Joint Laboratory for Integrated Prevention and Control of 
Transboundary Pests, Yunnan Agricultural University, Kunming 650201, China.

Magnaporthe oryzae is one of the most important fungal pathogens of rice. Chitin 
and avirulent strains can induce two layers of immunity response, 
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI) and 
effector-triggered immunity (ETI), in rice with cognate R genes. However, little 
is known about the assembly of the rice microbiome induced by PTI and ETI in 
rice. In this study, we investigate the impact of continuous treatment of the 
avirulent M. oryzae strain with AvrPi9 and chitin on the bacterial endophytic 
community of rice varieties harboring resistant gene Pi9 and their antagonistic 
activity against rice blast fungus. Analysis of the 16S rRNA showed a 
significant increase in the diversity and microbial co-occurrence network 
complexity and the number of beneficial taxa-Bacillus, Pseudomonas, 
Microbacterium, and Stenotrophomonas spp.-following the chitin and avirulent 
strain treatments. The antifungal assay with bacterial endophytes recovered from 
the leaves showed few bacteria with antagonistic potential in rice treated with 
avirulent strains, suggesting that the sequential treatment of the avirulent 
strain decreased the antagonistic bacteria against M. oryzae. Moreover, we 
identified Bacillus safensis Ch_66 and Bacillus altitudinis Nc_68 with overall 
antagonistic activities in vivo and in vitro. Our findings provide a novel 
insight into rice microbiome assembly in response to different innate immunity 
reactions.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12071323
PMCID: PMC11279204
PMID: 39065092

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests or personal relationships in this research.

1. Biochimie. 2024 Jul 22:S0300-9084(24)00173-1. doi:
10.1016/j.biochi.2024.07.014.  Online ahead of print.

Exploring the evolutionary landscape and structural resonances of ferritin with 
insights into functional significance in plant.

Sultana F(1), Ghosh A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shahjalal University of 
Science and Technology, Sylhet, 3114, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shahjalal University of 
Science and Technology, Sylhet, 3114, Bangladesh. Electronic address: 
aghosh-bmb@sust.edu.

The mineral iron plays a crucial role in facilitating the optimal functioning of 
numerous biological processes within the cellular environment. These processes 
involve the transportation of oxygen, energy production, immune system 
functioning, cognitive abilities, and muscle function. However, it is crucial to 
note that excessive levels of iron can result in oxidative damage within cells, 
primarily through Fenton reactions. Iron availability and toxicity present 
significant challenges that have been addressed through evolution. Ferritin is 
an essential protein that stores iron and is divided into different subfamilies, 
including DNA-binding proteins under starvation (Dps), bacterioferritin, and 
classical ferritin. Ferritin plays a critical role in maintaining cellular 
balance and protecting against oxidative damage. This study delves into 
ferritin's evolutionary dynamics across diverse taxa, emphasizing structural 
features and regulatory mechanisms. Insights into ferritin's evolution and 
functional diversity are gained through phylogenetic and structural analysis in 
bacterial Dps, bacterioferritin, and classical ferritin proteins. Additionally, 
the involvement of ferritin in plant stress responses and development is 
explored. Analysis of ferritin gene expression across various developmental 
stages and stress conditions provides insights into its regulatory roles. This 
comprehensive exploration enhances our understanding of ferritin's significance 
in plant biology, offering insights into its evolutionary history, structural 
diversity, and protective mechanisms against oxidative stress.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biochi.2024.07.014
PMID: 39047810

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. PLoS One. 2024 Jul 24;19(7):e0307639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307639. 
eCollection 2024.

Microbiota composition effect on immunotherapy outcomes in colorectal cancer 
patients: A systematic review.

Ajab SM(1), Zoughbor SH(2), Labania LA(2), Östlundh LM(3), Orsud HS(2), Olanda 
MA(2), Alkaabi O(2), Alkuwaiti SH(2), Alnuaimi SM(2), Al Rasbi Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United 
Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(3)University Library, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have emerged as an effective 
treatment for colorectal cancer (CRC). Studies indicate that the composition of 
gut microbiota could potentially serve as a biomarker for predicting the 
clinical effectiveness of immune checkpoint inhibitors.
METHODS: Following PRISMA guidelines, the review was conducted after registering 
the protocol with PROSPERO. A comprehensive literature search was carried out 
across five databases: PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane 
Library. Assessment tools from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) were used 
to gauge the quality of the studies.
RESULTS: A total of 5,132 papers were identified, and three studies and one 
conference abstract published between 2017-2022 met the inclusion criteria and 
were summarized in a descriptive synthesis table. These four studies were in 
accord with the following findings, four main phyla, Firmicutes, Bacteroidata, 
Actinobacteria, and Verrucomicrobiota were associated with CRC patients' 
clinical response toward ICIs treatment. Ruminococcaceae was predominantly 
related to CRC patients responding to therapy, while the Micrococcaceae family 
was more common among the non-responders. Bacterial taxa such as 
Faecalibacterium and Prevotellaceae were associated with better responses to 
ICIs and could be predictive biomarkers. The signature of fecal microbiota with 
Akkermansia muciniphila and Eubacterium rectale enrichment, and Rothia 
mucilaginosa depletion could independently predict better response to ICIs in 
patients with CRC.
CONCLUSION: The findings have brought attention to the notable differences in 
terms of richness and composition of microbiota between patients who responded 
positively to the treatment and those who did not. Bacterial species and 
families, such as Faecalibacterium, Bifidobacterium, Lachnospiraceae, 
Akkermansia sp., Ruminococcaceae, and Prevotellaceae, have consistently surfaced 
as potential indicators of immunotherapeutic responses. Furthermore, this review 
also emphasizes the need for additional comprehensive, multi-center studies with 
larger sample sizes to validate reported microbiota and expand our understanding 
of the role of gut microbiota in CRC ICIs therapy. PROSPERO ID: CRD42021277691.

Copyright: © 2024 Ajab et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307639
PMCID: PMC11268651
PMID: 39047017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Biol Lipids. 2024 Oct;1869(7):159535. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbalip.2024.159535. Epub 2024 Jul 20.

Apolipoprotein H deficiency exacerbates alcohol-induced liver injury via gut 
Dysbiosis and altered bile acid metabolism.

Liu Y(1), Li T(2), Xu J(3), Li S(4), Li B(5), Elgozair M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The Second Hospital of Dalian 
Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning Province, China 116011; Department of 
Digestive Diseases, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 
Province, China 361001. Electronic address: yaming0856@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Digestive Diseases, School of Medicine, Xiamen University, 
Xiamen, Fujian Province, China 361001.
(3)Clinical Center of Immune-Mediated Digestive Diseases, Peking University 
People's Hospital, Beijing, China 100044.
(4)The Fourth Liver Disease Center, Beijing YouAn Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China 100069.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA 
55902.

BACKGROUND: APOH plays an essential role in lipid metabolism and the transport 
of lipids in the circulation. Previous studies have shown that APOH deficiency 
causes fatty liver and gut microbiota dysbiosis in mouse models. However, the 
role and potential mechanisms of APOH deficiency in the pathogenesis of 
alcoholic liver disease remain unclear.
METHODS: C57BL/6 WT and ApoH-/- mice were used to construct the binge-on-chronic 
alcohol feeding model. Mouse liver transcriptome, targeted bile acid metabolome, 
and 16S gut bacterial taxa were assayed and analyzed. Open-source human liver 
transcriptome dataset was analyzed.
RESULTS: ApoH-/- mice fed with alcohol showed severe hepatic steatosis. Liver 
RNAseq and RT-qPCR data indicated that APOH deficiency predominantly impacts 
hepatic lipid metabolism by disrupting de novo lipogenesis, cholesterol 
processing, and bile acid metabolism. A targeted bile acid metabolomics assay 
indicated significant changes in bile acid composition, including increased 
percentages of TCA in the liver and DCA in the gut of alcohol-fed ApoH-/- mice. 
The concentrations of CA, NorCA, and HCA in the liver were higher in ApoH-/- 
mice on an ethanol diet compared to the control mice (p < 0.05). Additionally, 
APOH deficiency altered the composition of gut flora, which correlated with 
changes in the liver bile acid composition in the ethanol-feeding mouse model. 
Finally, open-source transcript-level data from human ALD livers highlighted a 
remarkable link between APOH downregulation and steatohepatitis, as well as bile 
acid metabolism.
CONCLUSION: APOH deficiency aggravates alcohol induced hepatic steatosis through 
the disruption of gut microbiota homeostasis and bile acid metabolism in mice.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2024.159535
PMID: 39033850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Yaming Liu has 
patent issued to Yaming Liu. If there are other authors, they declare that they 
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Jul 4;15:1423951. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1423951. 
eCollection 2024.

Large-scale bidirectional Mendelian randomization study identifies new gut 
microbiome significantly associated with immune thrombocytopenic purpura.

Li J(1), Li J(1), Liu Y(1), Zeng J(1), Liu Y(1), Wu Y(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Chengdu, China.
(2)Department of Stomatology, Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, China.

INTRODUCTION: A variety of studies have shown a link between the gut microbiota 
and autoimmune diseases, but the causal relationship with Henoch-Schönlein 
purpura (HSP) and immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is unknown.
METHODS: This study investigated the bidirectional causality between gut 
microbiota and HSP and ITP using Mendelian randomization (MR). Large-scale 
genetic data of gut microbiota at phylum to species level from the MiBioGen 
consortium and the Dutch Microbiome Project were utilized. Genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) summary statistics for HSP and ITP came from FinnGen 
R10. Various MR methods were applied to infer causal relationships, including 
inverse variance weighted (IVW), maximum likelihood (ML), cML-MA, MR-Egger, 
weighted median, weighted model, and MR-PRESSO. Multiple sensitivity analyses 
and Bonferroni correction were conducted to enhance robustness and reliability.
RESULTS: Based on the IVW estimates, 23 bacterial taxa were identified to have 
suggestive associations with HSP and ITP. Remarkably, after Bonferroni 
correction, family Alcaligenaceae (OR = 2.86, 95% CI = 1.52-5.37; IVW, 
p = 1.10 × 10-3, ML, p = 1.40 × 10-3) was significantly associated with ITP as a 
risk factor, while family Bacteroidales S24 7group (OR = 0.46, 95% 
CI = 0.29-0.74; IVW, p = 1.40 × 10-3) was significantly associated with ITP as a 
protective factor. No significant associations between HSP and ITP and gut 
microbiota were found in reverse analyses.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence of causal effects of gut microbiota on 
HSP and ITP, highlighting the importance of further research to clarify the 
underlying mechanisms and develop targeted therapeutic interventions for these 
autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2024 Li, Li, Liu, Zeng, Liu and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1423951
PMCID: PMC11257036
PMID: 39027091

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Environ Microbiol. 2024 Jul;26(7):e16676. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.16676.

The underground world of plant disease: Rhizosphere dysbiosis reduces 
above-ground plant resistance to bacterial leaf spot and alters plant 
transcriptome.

Ketehouli T(1), Pasche J(1), Buttrós VH(1), Goss EM(1)(2), Martins SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 
USA.
(2)Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 
USA.

Just as the human gut microbiome is colonized by a variety of microbes, so too 
is the rhizosphere of plants. An imbalance in this microbial community, known as 
dysbiosis, can have a negative impact on plant health. This study sought to 
explore the effect of rhizosphere dysbiosis on the health of tomato plants 
(Solanum lycopersicum L.), using them and the foliar bacterial spot pathogen 
Xanthomonas perforans as model organisms. The rhizospheres of 3-week-old tomato 
plants were treated with either streptomycin or water as a control, and then 
spray-inoculated with X. perforans after 24 h. Half of the plants that were 
treated with both streptomycin and X. perforans received soil microbiome 
transplants from uninfected plant donors 48 h after the streptomycin was 
applied. The plants treated with streptomycin showed a 26% increase in disease 
severity compared to those that did not receive the antibiotic. However, the 
plants that received the soil microbiome transplant exhibited an intermediate 
level of disease severity. The antibiotic-treated plants demonstrated a reduced 
abundance of rhizobacterial taxa such as Cyanobacteria from the genus 
Cylindrospermum. They also showed a down-regulation of genes related to plant 
primary and secondary metabolism, and an up-regulation of plant defence genes 
associated with induced systemic resistance. This study highlights the vital 
role that beneficial rhizosphere microbes play in disease resistance, even 
against foliar pathogens.

© 2024 The Author(s). Environmental Microbiology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1462-2920.16676
PMID: 39010309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Asthma Allergy. 2024 Jul 9;17:633-651. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S472632. eCollection
 2024.

Association Between Gut and Nasal Microbiota and Allergic Rhinitis: A Systematic 
Review.

Hu Y(1), Zhang R(2), Li J(1), Wang H(3), Wang M(3), Ren Q(1), Fang Y(1), Tian 
L(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital of Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Jiangsu Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Chengdu university of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu, Sichuan, 
People's Republic of China.

Allergic rhinitis is a chronic non-infectious inflammation of the nasal mucosa 
mediated by specific IgE. Recently, the human microbiome has drawn broad 
interest as a potential new target for treating this condition. This paper 
succinctly summarizes the main findings of 17 eligible studies published by 
February 2024, involving 1044 allergic rhinitis patients and 954 healthy 
controls from 5 countries. These studies examine differences in the human 
microbiome across important mucosal interfaces, including the nasal and 
intestinal areas, between patients and controls. Overall, findings suggest 
variations in the gut microbiota between allergic rhinitis patients and healthy 
individuals, although the specific bacterial taxa that significantly changed 
were not always consistent across studies. Due to the limited scope of existing 
research and patient coverage, the relationship between the nasal microbiome and 
allergic rhinitis remains inconclusive. The article discusses the potential 
immune-regulating role of the gut microbiome in allergic rhinitis. Further 
well-designed clinical trials with large-scale recruitment of allergic rhinitis 
patients are encouraged.

© 2024 Hu et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S472632
PMCID: PMC11246088
PMID: 39006241

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.

1. PeerJ. 2024 Jul 11;12:e17477. doi: 10.7717/peerj.17477. eCollection 2024.

Gut microbiome-immune interactions and their role in rheumatoid arthritis 
development.

Nurgaziyev M(1)(2), Issilbayeva A(1)(3), Bersimbaev R(2), Ilderbayev O(2), 
Vinogradova E(1), Jarmukhanov Z(1), Nurgozhina A(1), Sergazy S(1), Kozhabergen 
N(1), Akhmetova Z(3), Meiramova A(1)(3), Chulenbayeva L(1), Ibrayeva A(1), 
Mukhanbetzhanov N(1), Mukhanbetzhanova Z(1), Kozhakhmetov S(1), Ainabekova 
B(1)(3), Kushugulova A(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Microbiome, Center for Life Sciences, National Laboratory 
Astana, Nazarbayev University, Astana, Kazakhstan.
(2)Department of General Biology and Genomics, L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National 
University, Astana, Kazakhstan.
(3)NJSC Astana Medical University, Astana, Kazakhstan.

OBJECTIVE: The primary objective is to study the impact of gut microbiota and 
their interactions with diverse immunological markers on the development of 
rheumatoid arthritis.
METHODS: This study was performed in Astana, Kazakhstan, and included 77 Kazakh 
female patients older than 18 years, who met the American College of 
Rheumatology 2010 classification criteria for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and 113 
healthy controls. The DNA was extracted from fecal samples obtained from all 
study participants for subsequent sequencing at the 16S rRNA gene V1-V3 locus, 
facilitating the analysis of the gut microbiome. The Multiplex immunoassay was 
employed to measure the concentrations of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, 
and immunoglobulins in both fecal and plasma samples.
RESULTS: Our taxonomic analysis revealed significant differences in the 
composition of the gut microbiota between the healthy control cohort and the 
cohort with rheumatoid arthritis RA. Alpha diversity was significantly lower in 
the RA group. Lachnospiraceae were the most abundant taxon and found to be 
crucial, showing correlations with immunological markers such as IL5. 
Additionally, Lachnospiraceae and Oscillospiraceae exhibited the most 
predictable power and distinguished the composition of both study groups.
CONCLUSION: Our study identifies key differences in the gut microbiome of RA 
patients, revealing distinct microbial patterns and specific taxa abundance. We 
highlight potential biomarkers in immunological and bacterial pathways, offering 
insights into RA development and indicating possibilities for personalized 
treatment.

© 2024 Nurgaziyev et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.17477
PMCID: PMC11246623
PMID: 39006008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 21;25(13):6831. doi: 10.3390/ijms25136831.

Association between Circulating T Cells and the Gut Microbiome in Healthy 
Individuals: Findings from a Pilot Study.

Vivek S(1), Shen YS(2), Guan W(2), Onyeaghala G(3), Oyenuga M(4), Staley C(5), 
Karger AB(1), Prizment AE(1), Thyagarajan B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, MMC 
609, 420 Delaware Street, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(2)Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
(3)Hennepin Healthcare Research Institute (HHRI), Minneapolis, MN 55404, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Abbott Northwestern Hospital, Minneapolis, 
MN 55407, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Though the microbiome's impact on immune system homeostasis is well documented, 
the effect of circulating T cells on the gut microbiome remains unexamined. We 
analyzed data from 50 healthy volunteers in a pilot trial of aspirin, using 
immunophenotyping and 16S rRNA sequencing to evaluate the effect of baseline T 
cells on microbiome changes over 6 weeks. We employed an unsupervised sparse 
canonical correlation analysis (sCCA) and used multivariable linear regression 
models to evaluate the association between selected T cell subsets and selected 
bacterial genera after adjusting for covariates. In the cross-sectional 
analysis, percentages of naïve CD4+ T cells were positively associated with a 
relative abundance of Intestinimonas, and the percentage of activated CD8+ T 
cells was inversely associated with Cellulosibacter. In the longitudinal 
analysis, the baseline percentages of naïve CD4+ T cells and activated CD4+ T 
cells were inversely associated with a 6-week change in the relative abundance 
of Clostridium_XlVb and Anaerovorax, respectively. The baseline percentage of 
terminal effector CD4+ T cells was positively associated with the change in 
Flavonifractor. Notably, the microbiome taxa associated with T cell subsets 
exclusively belonged to the Bacillota phylum. These findings can guide future 
experimental studies focusing on the role of T cells in impacting gut microbiome 
homeostasis.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25136831
PMCID: PMC11241708
PMID: 38999941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no competing financial or 
non-financial interests in relation to this manuscript. The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest. A.B.K. received speaker honoraria from Siemens Healthcare 
Diagnostics, the American Society of Nephrology, and Yale University Department 
of Laboratory Medicine, all unrelated to this manuscript.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 12;14(1):16158. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-60225-0.

Familial clustering of dysbiotic oral and fecal microbiomes in juvenile 
dermatomyositis.

Koester ST(#)(1)(2), Chow A(#)(3)(4), Pepper-Tunick E(5), Lee P(6), Eckert 
M(7)(8), Brenchley L(9), Gardner P(9)(10), Song HJ(6), Li N(1), Schiffenbauer 
A(11), Volochayev R(11), Bayat N(11)(12), McLean JS(13), Rider LG(11), Shenoi 
S(3)(7), Stevens AM(3)(7)(14), Dey N(15)(16)(17).

Author information:
(1)Translational Science and Therapeutics Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(4)Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, USA.
(5)Molecular Engineering and Sciences Institute, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)School of Dentistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Center for Clinical and Translational Research, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)Center for Immunity and Immunotherapies, Seattle Children's Research 
Institute, Seattle, WA, USA.
(9)Office of the Clinical Director, NIDCR, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Oral Oncology at BC Cancer, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(11)Environmental Autoimmunity Group, Clinical Research Branch, National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(12)Social and Scientific Systems, Inc., A DLH Holdings Corp. Company, Silver 
Spring, MD, USA.
(13)Department of Periodontics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(14)Janssen, a Wholly Owned Subsidiary of Johnson & Johnson, Raritan, USA.
(15)Translational Science and Therapeutics Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer 
Center, Seattle, WA, USA. ndey@fredhutch.org.
(16)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. ndey@fredhutch.org.
(17)Microbiome Research Initiative, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, WA, 
USA. ndey@fredhutch.org.
(#)Contributed equally

Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM) is a rare immune-mediated disease of childhood 
with putative links to microbial exposures. In this multi-center, prospective, 
observational cohort study, we evaluated whether JDM is associated with discrete 
oral and gut microbiome signatures. We generated 16S rRNA sequencing data from 
fecal, saliva, supragingival, and subgingival plaque samples from JDM probands 
(n = 28). To control for genetic and environmental determinants of microbiome 
community structure, we also profiled microbiomes of unaffected family members 
(n = 27 siblings, n = 26 mothers, and n = 17 fathers). Sample type 
(oral-vs-fecal) and nuclear family unit were the predominant variables 
explaining variance in microbiome diversity, more so than having a diagnosis of 
JDM. The oral and gut microbiomes of JDM probands were more similar to their own 
unaffected siblings than they were to the microbiomes of other JDM probands. In 
a sibling-paired within-family analysis, several potentially immunomodulatory 
bacterial taxa were differentially abundant in the microbiomes of JDM probands 
compared to their unaffected siblings, including Faecalibacterium (gut) and 
Streptococcus (oral cavity). While microbiome features of JDM are often shared 
by unaffected family members, the loss or gain of specific fecal and oral 
bacteria may play a role in disease pathogenesis or be secondary to immune 
dysfunction in susceptible individuals.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-60225-0
PMCID: PMC11245510
PMID: 38997299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. ISME J. 2024 Jan 8;18(1):wrae127. doi: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae127.

Linking active rectal mucosa-attached microbiota to host immunity reveals its 
role in host-pathogenic STEC O157 interactions.

Pan Z(1), Chen Y(1), Zhou M(1), McAllister TA(2), Mcneilly TN(3), Guan LL(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural, Food and Nutritional Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2P5, Canada.
(2)Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Lethbridge Research Centre, Lethbridge, AB 
T1J 4B1, Canada.
(3)Moredun Research Institute, Penicuik EH26 0PZ, United Kingdom.
(4)Faculty of Land and Food Systems, The University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada.

The rectal-anal junction (RAJ) is the major colonization site of Shiga 
toxin-producing Escherichia coli (STEC) O157 in beef cattle, leading to 
transmission of this foodborne pathogen from farms to food chains. To date, 
there is limited understanding regarding whether the mucosa-attached microbiome 
has a profound impact on host-STEC interactions. In this study, the active RAJ 
mucosa-attached microbiota and its potential role in host immunity-STEC 
commensal interactions were investigated using RAJ mucosal biopsies collected 
from calves orally challenged with two STEC O157 strains with or without 
functional stx2a (stx2a+ or stx2a-). The results revealed that shifts of 
microbial diversity, topology, and assembly patterns were subjected to stx2a 
production post-challenge and Paeniclostridium and Gallibacterium were the 
keystone taxa for both microbial interactions and assembly. Additional mucosal 
transcriptome profiling showed stx2a-dependent host immune responses (i.e. B- 
and T-cell signaling and antigen processing and presentation) post-challenge. 
Further integrated analysis revealed that mucosa-attached beneficial microbes 
(i.e. Provotella, Faecalibacterium, and Dorea) interacted with host immune genes 
pre-challenge to maintain host homeostasis; however, opportunistic pathogenic 
microbes (i.e. Paeniclostridium) could interact with host immune genes after the 
STEC O157 colonization and interactions were stx2a-dependent. Furthermore, 
predicted bacterial functions involved in pathogen (O157 and Paeniclostridium) 
colonization and metabolism were related to host immunity. These findings 
suggest that during pathogen colonization, host-microbe interactions could shift 
from beneficial to opportunistic pathogenic bacteria driven and be dependent on 
the production of particular virulence factors, highlighting the potential 
regulatory role of mucosa-attached microbiota in affecting pathogen-commensal 
host interactions in calves with STEC O157 infection.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae127
PMCID: PMC11304501
PMID: 38984791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 Jun 25;14:1420389. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2024.1420389. eCollection 2024.

Comparative analysis of intestinal microbiota composition between free-ranged 
captive yak populations in Nimu County.

Zhu Y(1)(2)(3), Lu S(4)(5), Cidan Y(1), Wang H(1), Li K(4)(5), Basang W(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Medicine, Tibet Academy of 
Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Sciences, Lhasa, China.
(2)Linzhou Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Station, Lhasa, China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, 
China.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 
China.
(5)MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China.

The intestinal microbiota assumes a pivotal role in modulating host metabolism, 
immune responses, overall health, and additional physiological dimensions. The 
structural and functional characteristics of the intestinal microbiota may cause 
alterations within the host's body to a certain extent. The composition of the 
gut microbiota is associated with environmental factors, dietary habits, and 
other pertinent conditions. The investigation into the gut microbiota of yaks 
remained relatively underexplored. An examination of yak gut microbiota holds 
promise in elucidating the complex relationship between microbial communities 
and the adaptive responses of the host to its environment. In this study, yak 
were selected from two distinct environmental conditions: those raised in sheds 
(NS, n=6) and grazed in Nimu County (NF, n=6). Fecal samples were collected from 
the yaks and subsequently processed for analysis through 16S rDNA and ITS 
sequencing methodologies. The results revealed that different feeding styles 
result in significant differences in the Alpha diversity of fungi in the gut of 
yaks, while the gut microbiota of captive yaks was relatively conserved. In 
addition, significant differences appeared in the abundance of microorganisms in 
different taxa, phylum Verrucomicrobiota was significantly enriched in group NF 
while Firmicutes was higher in group NS. At the genus level, Akkermansia, 
Paenibacillus, Roseburia, Dorea, UCG_012, Anaerovorax and Marvinbryantia were 
enriched in group NF while Desemzia, Olsenella, Kocuria, Ornithinimicrobium and 
Parvibacter were higher in group NS (P<0.05 or P<0.01). There was a significant 
difference in the function of gut microbiota between the two groups. The 
observed variations are likely influenced by differences in feeding methods and 
environmental conditions both inside and outside the pen. The findings of this 
investigation offer prospective insights into enhancing the yak breeding and 
expansion of the yak industry.

Copyright © 2024 Zhu, Lu, Cidan, Wang, Li and Basang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2024.1420389
PMCID: PMC11231391
PMID: 38983117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Poult Sci. 2024 Sep;103(9):103970. doi: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.103970. Epub 2024
Jun  12.

Dietary Kluyveromyces marxianus hydrolysate alters humoral immunity, jejunal 
morphology, cecal microbiota and metabolic pathways in broiler chickens raised 
under a high stocking density.

Rassmidatta K(1), Theapparat Y(2), Chanaksorn N(3), Carcano P(4), Adeyemi KD(5), 
Ruangpanit Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture at Kamphaeng Sean, 
Kasetsart University, Kamphang Saen Campus, Nakhon Pathom, 73140 Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Functional Foods and Gastronomy, Faculty of 
Agro-Industry, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla 90110, Thailand.
(3)Innovad (Thailand) company limited, Bangplee, Samutprakarn, 10540 Thailand.
(4)Prosol S.p.A., 24040 Madone, Bergamo, Italy.
(5)Department of Animal Production, Faculty of Agriculture, University of 
Ilorin, Ilorin, Kwara State, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Animal Science, Faculty of Agriculture at Kamphaeng Sean, 
Kasetsart University, Kamphang Saen Campus, Nakhon Pathom, 73140 Thailand. 
Electronic address: yowares.s@ku.th.

This study investigated the impact of dietary supplementation with hydrolyzed 
yeast (Kluyveromyces marxianus) on growth performance, humoral immunity, jejunal 
morphology, cecal microbiota and metabolic pathways in broilers raised at 45 
kg/m2. A total of 1,176 mixed sex 1-day-old Ross 308 broilers were distributed 
into 42 pens and randomly assigned to either the control group, the control + 
250 g hydrolyzed yeast (HY)/ton, 250HY group, or the control + 500 g HY/ton, 
500HY group for 42 d. HY did not affect growth performance. However, HY reduced 
(P < 0.05) mortality at 25 to 35 d. Dietary HY lowered the heterophil/lymphocyte 
ratio and enhanced the villus height/crypt depth ratio and Newcastle disease 
titer (P < 0.05). Compared with HY250 and the control, HY500 upregulated (P < 
0.05) IL-10. HY enhanced the α diversity, inferring the richness and evenness of 
the ceca microbiota. HY500 had greater β diversity than the control (P < 0.05). 
Six bacterial phyla, namely, Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteria, Verrucomicrobia, and Cyanobacteria, were found. The relative 
abundance of Firmicutes was greater in the HY500 treatment group than in the 
HY250 and control groups. HY decreased the abundance of Actinobacteria. HY 
supplementation altered (P < 0.05) the abundance of 8 higher-level taxa 
consisting of 2 classes (Bacilli and Clostridia), 1 order (Lactobacillales), 1 
family (Streptococcaceae), and five genera (Streptococcus, Lachnospiraceae_uc, 
Akkermansiaceae, PACO01270_g, and LLKB_g). HY500 improved (P < 0.05) the 
abundance of Bacilli, Clostridia, Lactobacillales, Streptococcaceae, 
Streptococcus, PACO01270_g, and Lachnospiraceae_uc, while HY250 enhanced (P < 
0.05) the abundance of Akkermansiaceae and LLKB_g. HY improved the abundance of 
Lactobacillus and Akkermansia spp. Minimal set of pathway analyses revealed that 
compared with the control, both HY250 and HY500 regulated 20 metabolic pathways. 
These findings suggest that dietary K. marxianus hydrolysate, especially HY500, 
improved humoral immunity and jejunal morphology and beneficially altered the 
composition and metabolic pathways of the cecal microbiota in broilers raised at 
45 kg/m2.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2024.103970
PMCID: PMC11264189
PMID: 38970846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 2;14(1):15188. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-66097-8.

Characterising the Tasmanian devil (Sarcophilus harrisii) pouch microbiome in 
lactating and non-lactating females.

Ockert LE(1), McLennan EA(1), Fox S(2)(3), Belov K(1)(4), Hogg CJ(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, 2006, Australia.
(2)Save the Tasmanian Devil Program, NRE Tasmania, Hobart, TAS, 7001, Australia.
(3)Toledo Zoo, 2605 Broadway, Toledo, OH, 43609, USA.
(4)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia.
(5)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, The University of Sydney, Sydney, 
NSW, 2006, Australia. carolyn.hogg@sydney.edu.au.
(6)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Innovations in Peptide 
and Protein Science, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2006, Australia. 
carolyn.hogg@sydney.edu.au.
(7)San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, PO BOX 120551, San Diego, CA, 92112, USA. 
carolyn.hogg@sydney.edu.au.

Wildlife harbour a diverse range of microorganisms that affect their health and 
development. Marsupials are born immunologically naïve and physiologically 
underdeveloped, with primary development occurring inside a pouch. Secretion of 
immunological compounds and antimicrobial peptides in the epithelial lining of 
the female's pouch, pouch young skin, and through the milk, are thought to boost 
the neonate's immune system and potentially alter the pouch skin microbiome. 
Here, using 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, we characterised the Tasmanian devil 
pouch skin microbiome from 25 lactating and 30 non-lactating wild females to 
describe and compare across these reproductive stages. We found that the 
lactating pouch skin microbiome had significantly lower amplicon sequence 
variant richness and diversity than non-lactating pouches, however there was no 
overall dissimilarity in community structure between lactating and non-lactating 
pouches. The top five phyla were found to be consistent between both 
reproductive stages, with over 85% of the microbiome being comprised of 
Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, Fusobacteriota, Actinobacteriota, and Bacteroidota. 
The most abundant taxa remained consistent across all taxonomic ranks between 
lactating and non-lactating pouch types. This suggests that any potential 
immunological compounds or antimicrobial peptide secretions did not 
significantly influence the main community members. Of the more than 16,000 
total identified amplicon sequence variants, 25 were recognised as 
differentially abundant between lactating and non-lactating pouches. It is 
proposed that the secretion of antimicrobial peptides in the pouch act to 
modulate these microbial communities. This study identifies candidate bacterial 
clades on which to test the activity of Tasmanian devil antimicrobial peptides 
and their role in pouch young protection, which in turn may lead to future 
therapeutic development for human diseases.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-66097-8
PMCID: PMC11220038
PMID: 38956276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2024 Jun 11:rs.3.rs-4491589. doi: 
10.21203/rs.3.rs-4491589/v1.

Characterization of the family-level Borreliaceae pan-genome and development of 
an episomal typing protocol.

Socarras KM(1), Marino MC(1), Earl JP(1), Ehrlich RL, Cramer NA(2), Mell JC(1), 
Sen B(1), Ahmed A(1), Marconi RT(2), Ehrlich GD(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Genomic Sciences, Institute for Molecular Medicine and Infectious 
Disease, Drexel University College of Medicine.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Virginia Commonwealth University 
Medical Center.

BACKGROUND: The Borreliaceae family includes many obligate parasitic bacterial 
species which are etiologically associated with a myriad of zoonotic borrelioses 
including Lyme disease and vector-borne relapsing fevers. Infections by the 
Borreliaceae are difficult to detect by both direct and indirect methods, often 
leading to delayed and missed diagnoses. Efforts to improve diagnoses center 
around the development of molecular diagnostics (MDx), but due to deep tissue 
sequestration of the causative spirochaetes and the lack of persistent 
bacteremias, even MDx assays suffer from a lack of sensitivity. Additionally, 
the highly extensive genomic heterogeneity among isolates, even within the same 
species, contributes to the lack of assay sensitivity as single target assays 
cannot provide universal coverage. This within-species heterogeneity is partly 
due to differences in replicon repertoires and genomic structures that have 
likely arisen to support the complex Borreliaceae lifecycle in which these 
parasites have to survive in multiple hosts each with unique immune responses.
RESULTS: We constructed a Borreliaceae family-level pangenome and characterized 
the phylogenetic relationships among the constituent taxa which supports the 
recent taxonomy of splitting the family into at least two genera. Gene content 
pro les were created for the majority of the Borreliaceae replicons, providing 
for the first time their unambiguous molecular typing.
CONCLUSION: Our characterization of the Borreliaceae pan-genome supports the 
splitting of the former Borrelia genus into two genera and provides for the 
phylogenetic placement of several non-species designated isolates. Mining this 
family-level pangenome will enable precision diagnostics corresponding to gene 
content-driven clinical outcomes while also providing targets for interventions.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4491589/v1
PMCID: PMC11213207
PMID: 38947078

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests (NONE) Additional 
Declarations: No competing interests reported.

1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2024 Jun 28;10(1):54. doi:
10.1038/s41522-024-00526-4.

Metaproteomic portrait of the healthy human gut microbiota.

Tanca A(1), Palomba A(2), Fiorito G(3), Abbondio M(1)(4), Pagnozzi D(2), Uzzau 
S(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(2)Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, 
Alghero, Italy.
(3)Clinical Bioinformatic Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Unit of Microbiology and Virology, University Hospital of Sassari, Sassari, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy. 
uzzau@uniss.it.
(6)Unit of Microbiology and Virology, University Hospital of Sassari, Sassari, 
Italy. uzzau@uniss.it.

Gut metaproteomics can provide direct evidence of microbial functions actively 
expressed in the colonic environments, contributing to clarify the role of the 
gut microbiota in human physiology. In this study, we re-analyzed 10 fecal 
metaproteomics datasets of healthy individuals from different continents and 
countries, with the aim of identifying stable and variable gut microbial 
functions and defining the contribution of specific bacterial taxa to the main 
metabolic pathways. The "core" metaproteome included 182 microbial functions and 
83 pathways that were identified in all individuals analyzed. Several enzymes 
involved in glucose and pyruvate metabolism, along with glutamate dehydrogenase, 
acetate kinase, elongation factors G and Tu and DnaK, were the proteins with the 
lowest abundance variability in the cohorts under study. On the contrary, 
proteins involved in chemotaxis, response to stress and cell adhesion were among 
the most variable functions. Random-effect meta-analysis of correlation trends 
between taxa, functions and pathways revealed key ecological and molecular 
associations within the gut microbiota. The contribution of specific bacterial 
taxa to the main biological processes was also investigated, finding that 
Faecalibacterium is the most stable genus and the top contributor to 
anti-inflammatory butyrate production in the healthy gut microbiota. Active 
production of other mucosal immunomodulators facilitating host tolerance was 
observed, including Roseburia flagellin and lipopolysaccharide biosynthetic 
enzymes expressed by members of Bacteroidota. Our study provides a detailed 
picture of the healthy human gut microbiota, contributing to unveil its 
functional mechanisms and its relationship with nutrition, immunity, and 
environmental stressors.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-024-00526-4
PMCID: PMC11214629
PMID: 38944645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Vaccines (Basel). 2024 Jun 7;12(6):637. doi: 10.3390/vaccines12060637.

Immuno-Microbial Signature of Vaccine-Induced Immunity against SARS-CoV-2.

Umeda L(1), Torres A(2), Kunihiro BP(1), Rubas NC(1), Wells RK(1), 
Phankitnirundorn K(2), Peres R(2), Juarez R(3)(4), Maunakea AK(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences and Bioengineering, University of Hawaii, 
Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Biochemistry, and Physiology, John A. Burns School of 
Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.
(3)Department of Economics and UHERO, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822, 
USA.
(4)Hawaii Integrated Analytics, LLC, Honolulu, HI 96822, USA.

Although vaccines address critical public health needs, inter-individual 
differences in responses are not always considered in their development. 
Understanding the underlying basis for these differences is needed to optimize 
vaccine effectiveness and ultimately improve disease control. In this pilot 
study, pre- and post-antiviral immunological and gut microbiota features were 
characterized to examine inter-individual differences in SARS-CoV-2 mRNA vaccine 
response. Blood and stool samples were collected before administration of the 
vaccine and at 2-to-4-week intervals after the first dose. A cohort of 14 adults 
was separated post hoc into two groups based on neutralizing antibody levels 
(high [HN] or low [LN]) at 10 weeks following vaccination. Bivariate correlation 
analysis was performed to examine associations between gut microbiota, 
inflammation, and neutralization capacity at that timepoint. These analyses 
revealed significant differences in gut microbiome composition and inflammation 
states pre-vaccination, which predicted later viral neutralization capacity, 
with certain bacterial taxa, such as those in the genus Prevotella, found at 
higher abundance in the LN vs HN group that were also negatively correlated with 
a panel of inflammatory factors such as IL-17, yet positively correlated with 
plasma levels of the high mobility group box 1 (HMGB-1) protein at 
pre-vaccination. In particular, we observed a significant inverse relationship 
(Pearson = -0.54, p = 0.03) between HMGB-1 pre-vaccination and neutralization 
capacity at 10 weeks post-vaccination. Consistent with known roles as mediators 
of inflammation, our results altogether implicate HMGB-1 and related gut 
microbial signatures as potential biomarkers in predicting SARS-CoV-2 mRNA 
vaccine effectiveness measured by the production of viral neutralization 
antibodies.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines12060637
PMCID: PMC11209251
PMID: 38932366

Conflict of interest statement: The authors of this research paper declare the 
following potential conflicts of interest regarding patentable product 
associated with this study. Ruben Juarez and Alika Maunakea from Hawaii 
Integrated Analytics, LLC (HIA) may file a patent application related to 
technology described in this paper. Furthermore, Ruben Juarez and Alika Maunakea 
have a financial interest in HIA, a company that holds the exclusive license for 
commercializing of this technology. The involvement of the authors in the patent 
and the company does not influence the objectivity, integrity, or validity of 
the research findings presented in this paper. All data and results have been 
analyzed impartially, and appropriate steps have been taken to mitigate any 
potential bias. This conflict of interest disclosure is made to ensure 
transparency and maintain the highest ethical standards in scientific research. 
The other authors declare no competing interests exist.

1. Dev Comp Immunol. 2024 Oct;159:105221. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2024.105221. Epub
2024  Jun 24.

Evidence for immune priming specificity and cross-protection against sympatric 
and allopatric Vibrio splendidus strains in the oyster Magalana (Crassostrea) 
gigas.

Arfatahery N(1), Rafaluk C(2), Rolff J(1), Wegner KM(3).

Author information:
(1)Evolutionary Biology, Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Zoologie, 
Königin-Luise-Str. 1-3, 14195, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Evolutionary Biology, Freie Universität Berlin, Institut für Zoologie, 
Königin-Luise-Str. 1-3, 14195, Berlin, Germany. Electronic address: 
charlotte.rafaluk@fu-berlin.de.
(3)Alfred Wegener Institut, Hafenstraße 43, 25992, List, Germany.

Infections with pathogenic Vibrio strains are associated with high summer 
mortalities of Pacific oysters Magalana (Crassostrea) gigas, affecting 
production worldwide. This raises the question of how M. gigas cultures can be 
protected against deadly Vibro infection. There is increasing experimental 
evidence of immune priming in invertebrates, where previous exposure to a low 
pathogen load boosts the immune response upon secondary exposure. Priming 
responses, however, appear to vary in their specificity across host and parasite 
taxa. To test priming specificity in the Vibrio - M. gigas system, we used two 
closely related Vibrio splendidus strains with differing degrees of virulence 
towards M. gigas. These V. splendidus strains were either isolated in the same 
location as the oysters (sympatric, opening up the potential for co-evolution) 
or in a different location (allopatric). We extracted cell-free haemolymph 
plasma from infected and control oysters to test the influence of humoral immune 
effectors on bacterial growth in vitro. While addition of haemolypmph plasma in 
general promoted growth of both strains, priming by an exposure to a sublethal 
dose of bacterial cells lead to inhibitory effects against a subsequent 
challenge with a potentially lethal dose in vitro. Inhibitory effects and immune 
priming was strongest when oysters had been primed with the sympatric Vibrio 
strain, but inhibitory effects were seen both when challenged with the sympatric 
as well as against allopatric V. splendidus, suggesting some degree of cross 
protection. The stronger immune priming against the sympatric strain suggests 
that priming could be more efficient against matching local strains potentially 
adding a component of local adaptation or co-evolution to immune priming in 
oysters. These in vitro results, however, were not reflected in the in vivo 
infection data, where we saw increased bacterial loads following an initial 
challenge. This discrepancy might suggests that that it is the humoral part of 
the oyster immune system that produces the priming effects seen in our in vitro 
experiments.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dci.2024.105221
PMID: 38925430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Nat Microbiol. 2024 Sep;9(9):2262-2277. doi: 10.1038/s41564-024-01735-5. Epub 
2024 Jun 25.

Spatial mapping of mobile genetic elements and their bacterial hosts in complex 
microbiomes.

Grodner B(1), Shi H(1)(2), Farchione O(1), Vill AC(1), Ntekas I(1), Diebold 
PJ(1), Wu DT(3), Chen CY(3), Kim DM(3), Zipfel WR(1), Brito IL(1), De Vlaminck 
I(4).

Author information:
(1)Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)Kanvas Biosciences, Inc, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA.
(3)Division of Periodontology, Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and 
Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
vlaminck@cornell.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Jun 09:2023.06.09.544291. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.09.544291.

The exchange of mobile genetic elements (MGEs) facilitates the spread of 
functional traits including antimicrobial resistance within bacterial 
communities. Tools to spatially map MGEs and identify their bacterial hosts in 
complex microbial communities are currently lacking, limiting our understanding 
of this process. Here we combined single-molecule DNA fluorescence in situ 
hybridization (FISH) with multiplexed ribosomal RNA-FISH to enable simultaneous 
visualization of both MGEs and bacterial taxa. We spatially mapped bacteriophage 
and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) plasmids and identified their host taxa in 
human oral biofilms. This revealed distinct clusters of AMR plasmids and 
prophage, coinciding with densely packed regions of host bacteria. Our data 
suggest spatial heterogeneity in bacterial taxa results in heterogeneous MGE 
distribution within the community, with MGE clusters resulting from horizontal 
gene transfer hotspots or expansion of MGE-carrying strains. Our approach can 
help advance the study of AMR and phage ecology in biofilms.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-024-01735-5
PMCID: PMC11371653
PMID: 38918467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.S. is a co-founder at Kanvas Biosciences. 
I.D.V. is a member of the Scientific Advisory Board of Karius Inc. and GenDX, 
and a co-founder of Kanvas Biosciences. H.S. and I.D.V. are listed as inventors 
on patents related to multiplexed imaging methods (US20210047634A1, United 
States, 2019; US20230159989A1, United States, 2022; US20230265504A1, United 
States, 2023). P.J.D. is an employee of Kanvas Biosciences. The other authors 
declare no competing interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Jun 4;15:1402718. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1402718. 
eCollection 2024.

Genetically supported causality between gut microbiota, immune cells, and 
ischemic stroke: a two-sample Mendelian randomization study.

Shuai H(1)(2), Wang Z(1), Xiao Y(1), Ge Y(1), Mao H(2), Gao J(1).

Author information:
(1)Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital Affiliated to Yangzhou University, 
Yangzhou, China.
(2)Peking University People's Hospital, Qingdao Women and Children's Hospital, 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have highlighted a robust correlation between gut 
microbiota/immune cells and ischemic stroke (IS). However, the precise nature of 
their causal relationship remains uncertain. To address this gap, our study aims 
to meticulously investigate the causal association between gut microbiota/immune 
cells and the likelihood of developing IS, employing a two-sample Mendelian 
randomization (MR) analysis.
METHODS: Our comprehensive analysis utilized summary statistics from genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) on gut microbiota, immune cells, and IS. The primary 
MR method employed was the inverse variance-weighted (IVW) approach. To address 
potential pleiotropy and identify outlier genetic variants, we incorporated the 
Mendelian randomization pleiotropy residual sum and outlier (MR-PRESSO) 
technique, along with MR-Egger regression. Heterogeneity was assessed using 
Cochran's Q-test. Additionally, leave-one-out analysis was conducted to pinpoint 
any individual genetic variant influencing the observed causal associations. 
Finally, a reverse MR analysis was performed to explore the potential of reverse 
causation.
RESULTS: Our investigation revealed four gut microbial taxa and 16 immune cells 
with a significant causal relationship with IS (p < 0.05). Notably, two 
bacterial features and five immunophenotypes were strongly associated with a 
lower IS risk: genus.Barnesiella.id.944 (OR: 0.907, 95% CI: 0.836-0.983, p = 
0.018), genus.LachnospiraceaeNK4A136group.id.11319 (OR: 0.918, 95% CI: 
0.853-0.983, p = 0.988), Activated & resting Treg % CD4++ (OR: 0.977, 95% CI: 
0.956-0.998, p = 0.028). Additionally, significant associations between IS risk 
and two bacterial features along with eleven immunophenotypes were observed: 
genus.Paraprevotella.id.962 (OR: 1.106, 95% CI: 1.043-1.172, p < 0.001), 
genus.Streptococcus.id.1853 (OR: 1.119, 95% CI: 1.034-1.210, p = 0.005), CD127 
on granulocyte (OR: 1.039, 95% CI: 1.009-1.070, p = 0.011). Our analyses did not 
reveal heterogeneity based on the Cochrane's Q-test (p > 0.05) nor indicate 
instances of horizontal pleiotropy according to MR-Egger and MR-PRESSO analyses 
(p > 0.05). Furthermore, the robustness of our MR results was confirmed through 
leave-one-out analysis.
CONCLUSION: Our study provides further evidence supporting the potential 
association between gut microbiota and immune cells in relation to IS, shedding 
light on the underlying mechanisms that may contribute to this condition. These 
findings lay a solid foundation for future investigations into targeted 
prevention strategies.

Copyright © 2024 Shuai, Wang, Xiao, Ge, Mao and Gao.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1402718
PMCID: PMC11185428
PMID: 38894965

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Nutrients. 2024 May 29;16(11):1668. doi: 10.3390/nu16111668.

Implications of Microbiota and Immune System in Development and Progression of 
Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatotic Liver Disease.

Popov J(1), Despot T(2), Avelar Rodriguez D(3), Khan I(2), Mech E(4), Khan 
M(5)(6), Bojadzija M(7), Pai N(5)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Boston Combined Residency Program, Boston Children's Hospital & Boston 
Medical Center, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)College of Medicine and Health, University College Cork, T12 YN60 Cork, 
Ireland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 1E8, Canada.
(4)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, D04 C1P1 Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(6)Department of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Subotica General Hospital, 24000 Subotica, 
Serbia.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, McMaster Children's 
Hospital, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is the most 
prevalent type of liver disease worldwide. The exact pathophysiology behind 
MASLD remains unclear; however, it is thought that a combination of factors or 
"hits" act as precipitants for disease onset and progression. Abundant evidence 
supports the roles of diet, genes, metabolic dysregulation, and the intestinal 
microbiome in influencing the accumulation of lipids in hepatocytes and 
subsequent progression to inflammation and fibrosis. Currently, there is no cure 
for MASLD, but lifestyle changes have been the prevailing cornerstones of 
management. Research is now focusing on the intestinal microbiome as a potential 
therapeutic target for MASLD, with the spotlight shifting to probiotics, 
antibiotics, and fecal microbiota transplantation. In this review, we provide an 
overview of how intestinal microbiota interact with the immune system to 
contribute to the pathogenesis of MASLD and metabolic dysfunction-associated 
steatohepatitis (MASH). We also summarize key microbial taxa implicated in the 
disease and discuss evidence supporting microbial-targeted therapies in its 
management.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16111668
PMCID: PMC11175128
PMID: 38892602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. ISME J. 2024 Jan 8;18(1):wrae099. doi: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae099.

Intracellular symbiont Symbiodolus is vertically transmitted and widespread 
across insect orders.

Wierz JC(1), Dirksen P(1)(2), Kirsch R(1), Krüsemer R(1), Weiss B(1), Pauchet 
Y(1), Engl T(1), Kaltenpoth M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Insect Symbiosis, Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, 
07745 Jena, Germany.
(2)Department of Evolutionary Ecology, Institute of Organismic and Molecular 
Evolution, Johannes Gutenberg University, 55128 Mainz, Germany.

Insects engage in manifold interactions with bacteria that can shift along the 
parasitism-mutualism continuum. However, only a small number of bacterial taxa 
managed to successfully colonize a wide diversity of insects, by evolving 
mechanisms for host-cell entry, immune evasion, germline tropism, reproductive 
manipulation, and/or by providing benefits to the host that stabilize the 
symbiotic association. Here, we report on the discovery of an Enterobacterales 
endosymbiont (Symbiodolus, type species Symbiodolus clandestinus) that is 
widespread across at least six insect orders and occurs at high prevalence 
within host populations. Fluorescence in situ hybridization in several 
Coleopteran and one Dipteran species revealed Symbiodolus' intracellular 
presence in all host life stages and across tissues, with a high abundance in 
female ovaries, indicating transovarial vertical transmission. Symbiont genome 
sequencing across 16 host taxa revealed a high degree of functional conservation 
in the eroding and transposon-rich genomes. All sequenced Symbiodolus genomes 
encode for multiple secretion systems, alongside effectors and toxin-antitoxin 
systems, which likely facilitate host-cell entry and interactions with the host. 
However, Symbiodolus-infected insects show no obvious signs of disease, and 
biosynthetic pathways for several amino acids and cofactors encoded by the 
bacterial genomes suggest that the symbionts may also be able to provide 
benefits to the hosts. A lack of host-symbiont cospeciation provides evidence 
for occasional horizontal transmission, so Symbiodolus' success is likely based 
on a mixed transmission mode. Our findings uncover a hitherto undescribed and 
widespread insect endosymbiont that may present valuable opportunities to 
unravel the molecular underpinnings of symbiosis establishment and maintenance.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae099
PMCID: PMC11322605
PMID: 38874172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Imeta. 2024 Jan 1;3(1):e156. doi: 10.1002/imt2.156. eCollection 2024 Feb.

Gut microbiota reshapes cancer immunotherapy efficacy: Mechanisms and 
therapeutic strategies.

Xie J(1), Liu M(2), Deng X(1), Tang Y(1), Zheng S(3), Ou X(1), Tang H(1), Xie 
X(1), Wu M(1), Zou Y(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangdong Provincial 
Clinical Research Center for Cancer Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center 
Guangzhou China.
(2)Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Guangdong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Stomatology Sun Yat-sen University Guangzhou China.
(3)Department of Breast Surgery, Breast Disease Center, The First Affiliated 
Hospital Sun Yat-sen University Guangzhou China.

Gut microbiota is essential for maintaining local and systemic immune 
homeostasis in the presence of bacterial challenges. It has been demonstrated 
that microbiota play contrasting roles in cancer development as well as 
anticancer immunity. Cancer immunotherapy, a novel anticancer therapy that 
relies on the stimulation of host immunity, has suffered from a low responding 
rate and incidence of severe immune-related adverse events (irAEs). Previous 
studies have demonstrated that the diversity and composition of gut microbiota 
were associated with the heterogeneity of therapeutic effects. Therefore, 
alteration in microbiota taxa can lead to improved clinical outcomes in 
immunotherapy. In this review, we determine whether microbiota composition or 
microbiota-derived metabolites are linked to responses to immunotherapy and 
irAEs. Moreover, we discuss various approaches to improve immunotherapy efficacy 
or reduce toxicities by modulating microbiota composition.

© 2024 The Authors. iMeta published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on 
behalf of iMeta Science.

DOI: 10.1002/imt2.156
PMCID: PMC10989143
PMID: 38868510

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. J Cancer Immunol (Wilmington). 2024;6(1):1-13. doi: 
10.33696/cancerimmunol.6.078.

The Role of Tumor and Host Microbiome on Immunotherapy Response in Urologic 
Cancers.

Pfail J(1), Drobner J(1), Doppalapudi K(1), Saraiya B(2), Packiam V(1), 
Ghodoussipour S(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Urologic Oncology, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey and 
Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Oncology, Rutgers Cancer 
Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA.

INTRODUCTION & OBJECTIVE: The role of the microbiome in the development and 
treatment of genitourinary malignancies is just starting to be appreciated. 
Accumulating evidence suggests that the microbiome can modulate immunotherapy 
through signaling in the highly dynamic tumor microenvironment. Nevertheless, 
much is still unknown about the immuno-oncology-microbiome axis, especially in 
urologic oncology. The objective of this review is to synthesize our current 
understanding of the microbiome's role in modulating and predicting 
immunotherapy response to genitourinary malignancies.
METHODS: A literature search for peer-reviewed publications about the microbiome 
and immunotherapy response in bladder, kidney, and prostate cancer was 
conducted. All research available in PubMed, Google Scholar, clinicaltrials.gov, 
and bioRxiv up to September 2023 was analyzed.
RESULTS: Significant differences in urinary microbiota composition have been 
found in patients with genitourinary cancers compared to healthy controls. 
Lactic acid-producing bacteria, such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus 
genera, may have value in augmenting BCG responsiveness to bladder cancer. BCG 
may also be a dynamic regulator of PD-L1. Thus, the combination of BCG and 
immune checkpoint inhibitors may be an effective strategy for bladder cancer 
management. In advanced renal cell carcinoma, studies show that recent 
antibiotic administration negatively impacts survival outcomes in patients 
undergoing immunotherapy, while administration of CBM588, a live bacterial 
product, is associated with improved progression-free survival. Specific 
bacterial taxa, such as Streptococcus salivarius, have been linked with response 
to pembrolizumab in metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer. Fecal 
microbiota transplant has been shown to overcome resistance and reduce toxicity 
to immunotherapy; it is currently being investigated for both kidney and 
prostate cancers.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the exact mechanism is unclear, several studies identify a 
symbiotic relationship between microbiota-centered interventions and 
immunotherapy efficacy. It is possible to improve immunotherapy responsiveness 
in genitourinary malignancies using the microbiome, but further research with 
more standardized methodology is warranted.

DOI: 10.33696/cancerimmunol.6.078
PMCID: PMC11156155
PMID: 38846356

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Jun 6;12(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01806-z.

Compendium of 5810 genomes of sheep and goat gut microbiomes provides new 
insights into the glycan and mucin utilization.

Zhang K(#)(1), He C(#)(2), Wang L(#)(3), Suo L(#)(4)(5), Guo M(#)(6), Guo J(7), 
Zhang T(1), Xu Y(1), Lei Y(1), Liu G(1), Qian Q(1), Mao Y(1), Kalds P(1), Wu 
Y(4)(5), Cuoji A(4)(5), Yang Y(1), Brugger D(8), Gan S(9), Wang M(2), Wang 
X(10)(11)(12), Zhao F(13), Chen Y(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, China.
(2)College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, China.
(3)Plateau Livestock Genetic Resources Protection and Innovative Utilization Key 
Laboratory of Qinghai Province, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding 
On Tibetan Plateau, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Qinghai Academy 
of Animal and Veterinary Medicine, Qinghai University, Xining, 810016, China.
(4)Institute of Animal Sciences, Tibet Academy of Agricultural and Animal 
Husbandry Sciences, Lhasa, 850009, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding On Tibetan Plateau, Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Lhasa, 850009, China.
(6)College of Animal Engineering, Yangling Vocational and Technical College, 
Yangling, 712100, China.
(7)College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu, 611100, China.
(8)Institute of Animal Nutrition and Dietetics, Vetsuisse-Faculty, University of 
Zurich, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland.
(9)College of Coastal Agricultural Sciences, Guangdong Ocean University, 
Zhanjiang, 524088, China.
(10)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, China. 
xiaolongwang@nwafu.edu.cn.
(11)Key Laboratory of Livestock Biology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, China. xiaolongwang@nwafu.edu.cn.
(12)School of Future Technology On Bio-Breeding, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, 712100, China. xiaolongwang@nwafu.edu.cn.
(13)Computational Genomics Lab, Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 102206, China. zhfq@biols.ac.cn.
(14)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, China. 
chenyulin@nwafu.edu.cn.
(15)Key Laboratory of Livestock Biology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, China. chenyulin@nwafu.edu.cn.
(16)School of Future Technology On Bio-Breeding, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, 712100, China. chenyulin@nwafu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ruminant gut microbiota are critical in ecological adaptation, 
evolution, and nutrition utilization because it regulates energy metabolism, 
promotes nutrient absorption, and improves immune function. To study the 
functional roles of key gut microbiota in sheep and goats, it is essential to 
construct reference microbial gene catalogs and high-quality microbial genomes 
database.
RESULTS: A total of 320 fecal samples were collected from 21 different sheep and 
goat breeds, originating from 32 distinct farms. Metagenomic deep sequencing and 
binning assembly were utilized to construct a comprehensive microbial genome 
information database for the gut microbiota. We successfully generated the 
largest reference gene catalogs for gut microbiota in sheep and goats, 
containing over 162 million and 82 million nonredundant predicted genes, 
respectively, with 49 million shared nonredundant predicted genes and 1138 
shared species. We found that the rearing environment has a greater impact on 
microbial composition and function than the host's species effect. Through 
subsequent assembly, we obtained 5810 medium- and high-quality 
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs), out of which 2661 were yet unidentified 
species. Among these MAGs, we identified 91 bacterial taxa that specifically 
colonize the sheep gut, which encode polysaccharide utilization loci for glycan 
and mucin degradation.
CONCLUSIONS: By shedding light on the co-symbiotic microbial communities in the 
gut of small ruminants, our study significantly enhances the understanding of 
their nutrient degradation and disease susceptibility. Our findings emphasize 
the vast potential of untapped resources in functional bacterial species within 
ruminants, further expanding our knowledge of how the ruminant gut microbiota 
recognizes and processes glycan and mucins. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01806-z
PMCID: PMC11155115
PMID: 38845047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Immunother Cancer. 2024 Jun 6;12(6):e008686. doi: 10.1136/jitc-2023-008686.

Characterizations of multi-kingdom gut microbiota in immune checkpoint 
inhibitor-treated hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhu C(#)(1)(2), Zhang C(#)(3), Wang S(#)(1), Xun Z(#)(1), Zhang D(3), Lan Z(3), 
Zhang L(1), Chao J(1), Liang Y(3), Pu Z(3), Ning C(1), Sang X(1), Yang X(4), 
Wang H(4)(5), Jiang X(6), Zhao H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Liver Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC), Beijing, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery Center, Beijing Youan Hospital, Clinical Center 
for Liver Cancer, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(3)Microbiome Research Center, Moon (Guangzhou) Biotech Ltd, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Liver Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and Rare 
Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC), Beijing, China 
zhaoht@pumch.cn jxz@moonbio.com Wanghp@pumch.cn yangxiaobo67@pumch.cn.
(5)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, State Key Laboratory of 
Complex Severe and Rare Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking 
Union Medical College (CAMS & PUMC), Beijing, China.
(6)Microbiome Research Center, Moon (Guangzhou) Biotech Ltd, Guangzhou, China 
zhaoht@pumch.cn jxz@moonbio.com Wanghp@pumch.cn yangxiaobo67@pumch.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The association between gut bacteria and the response to immune 
checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been studied; 
however, multi-kingdom gut microbiome alterations and interactions in 
ICI-treated HCC cohorts are not fully understood.
METHODS: From November 2018 to April 2022, patients receiving ICI treatment for 
advanced HCC were prospectively enrolled. Herein, we investigated the 
multi-kingdom microbiota characterization of the gut microbiome, mycobiome, and 
metabolome using metagenomic, ITS2, and metabolomic data sets of 80 patients 
with ICI-treated HCC.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated that bacteria and metabolites differed 
significantly between the durable clinical benefit (DCB) and non-durable 
clinical benefit (NDB) groups, whereas the differences were smaller for fungi. 
The overall diversity of bacteria and fungi before treatment was higher in the 
DCB group than in the NDB group, and the difference in diversity began to change 
with the use of immunotherapy after 6-8 weeks. We also explored the alterations 
of gut microbes in the DCB and NDB groups, established 18 bacterial species 
models as predictive biomarkers for predicting whether immunotherapy is of 
sustained benefit (area under the curve=75.63%), and screened two species of 
bacteria (Actinomyces_sp_ICM47, and Senegalimassilia_anaerobia) and one 
metabolite (galanthaminone) as prognostic biomarkers for predicting survival in 
patients with HCC treated with ICI.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the status and characterization of the multi-kingdom 
microbiota, including gut bacteria, fungi, and their metabolites, were described 
by multiomics sequencing for the first time in patients with HCC treated with 
ICI. Our findings demonstrate the potential of bacterial taxa as predictive 
biomarkers of ICI clinical efficacy, and bacteria and their metabolites as 
prognostic biomarkers.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jitc-2023-008686
PMCID: PMC11163665
PMID: 38844407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.

1. Plant Pathol J. 2024 Jun;40(3):299-309. doi: 10.5423/PPJ.OA.12.2023.0175. Epub
 2024 Jun 1.

Changes in Endophyte Communities across the Different Plant Compartments in 
Response to the Rice Blast Infection.

Roy M(1), Burragoni SG(1), Jeon J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan 38541, Korea.
(2)Plant Immunity Research Centre, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, 
Korea.

The rice blast disease, caused by the fungal pathogen, Magnaporthe oryzae (syn. 
Pyricularia oryzae), poses a significant threat to the global rice production. 
Understanding how this disease impacts the plant's microbial communities is 
crucial for gaining insights into hostpathogen interactions. In this study, we 
investigated the changes in communities of bacterial and fungal endophytes 
inhabiting different compartments in healthy and diseased plants. We found that 
both alpha and beta diversities of endophytic communities do not change 
significantly by the pathogen infection. Rather, the type of plant compartment 
appeared to be the main driver of endophytic community structures. Although the 
overall structure seemed to be consistent between healthy and diseased plants, 
our analysis of differentially abundant taxa revealed the specific bacterial and 
fungal operational taxonomic units that exhibited enrichment in the root and 
leaf compartments of infected plants. These findings suggest that endophyte 
communities are robust to the changes at the early stage of pathogen infection, 
and that some of endophytes enriched in infected plants might have roles in the 
defense against the pathogen.

DOI: 10.5423/PPJ.OA.12.2023.0175
PMCID: PMC11162860
PMID: 38835301

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Junhyun Jeon, a 
contributing editor of the Plant Pathology Journal, was not involved in the 
editorial evaluation or decision to publish this article. All remaining authors 
have declared no conflicts of interest.

1. PLoS One. 2024 Jun 3;19(6):e0303029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0303029. 
eCollection 2024.

Changes of faecal bacterial communities and microbial fibrolytic activity in 
horses aged from 6 to 30 years old.

Baraille M(1)(2), Buttet M(2), Grimm P(2), Milojevic V(3), Julliand S(2), 
Julliand V(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut Agro Dijon, Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, PAM UMR A 02.102, 
Dijon, France.
(2)Lab To Field, Dijon, France.
(3)Sandgrueb-Stiftung, Zürich, Switzerland.

Horse owners and veterinarians report that from the age of 15, their horses can 
lose body condition and be more susceptible to diseases. Large intestinal 
microbiome changes may be involved. Indeed, microbiota is crucial for 
maintaining the condition and health of herbivores by converting fibres into 
nutrients. This study aimed to compare the faecal microbiome in horses aged from 
6 to 30 years old (yo), living in the same environment and consuming the same 
diet, in order to assess whether the parameters changed linearly with age and 
whether there was a pivotal age category. Fifty horses were selected from the 
same environment and distributed across four age categories: 6-10 (n = 12), 
11-15 (n = 11), 16-20 (n = 13), and 21-30 (n = 14) yo. All horses had no 
digestive problems, had teeth suitable for consuming their feed, and were up to 
date with their vaccination and deworming programmes. After three weeks of 
constant diet (ad libitum hay and 860 g of concentrate per day), one faecal 
sample per horse was collected on the same day. The bacterial communities' 
richness and intra-sample diversity were negatively correlated with age. There 
was a new distribution of non-beneficial and beneficial taxa, particularly in 
the 21-30 yo category. Although the faecal concentration of short-chain fatty 
acids remained stable, the acetate proportion was negatively correlated with age 
while it was the opposite for the proportions of butyrate, valerate, and 
iso-valerate. Additionally, the faecal pH was negatively correlated with age. 
Differences were more pronounced when comparing the 6-10 yo and 21-30 yo 
categories. The values of the parameters studied became more dispersed from the 
16-20 yo category onwards, which appeared as a transitional moment, as it did 
not differ significantly from the younger and older categories for most of these 
parameters. Our data suggest that the microbiome changes with age. By 
highlighting the pivotal age of 16-20, this gives the opportunity to intervene 
before individuals reach extremes that could lead to pathological conditions.

Copyright: © 2024 Baraille et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0303029
PMCID: PMC11146703
PMID: 38829841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. Ann Clin Microbiol Antimicrob. 2024 May 30;23(1):49. doi: 
10.1186/s12941-024-00710-6.

Chronic endometritis and the endometrial microbiota: implications for 
reproductive success in patients with recurrent implantation failure.

Zhang H(1), Zou H(1), Zhang C(1)(2), Zhang S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Reproductive Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
400010, China.
(2)Joint International Research Lab for Reproduction and Development of Ministry 
of Education of China, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400010, China.
(3)The Center for Reproductive Medicine, Obstetrics and Gynecology Department, 
The Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 
400010, China. shenzhang@cqmu.edu.cn.
(4)Joint International Research Lab for Reproduction and Development of Ministry 
of Education of China, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400010, China. 
shenzhang@cqmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Chronic endometritis (CE) is associated with poor reproductive 
outcomes, yet the role of endometrial microbiota in patients with recurrent 
implantation failure (RIF) and CE remains unclear. This study aims to 
characterize endometrial microbiota in RIF patients with CE and assess its 
implications for reproductive outcomes.
METHODS: In this prospective study, we enrolled RIF patients both with and 
without CE. Endometrial and cervical samples were collected for 16 S rRNA gene 
sequencing. Microbiota composition was compared between groups using diversity 
indices, phylum, and genus-level analysis. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) 
and Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to assess relationships 
between CE, reproductive outcomes, and microbiota. Predictive functional 
profiling was performed to evaluate metabolic pathways associated with CE.
RESULTS: Endometrial microbiota in CE patients exhibited greater diversity and 
evenness compared to non-CE patients. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) 
revealed distinct clustering between CE and non-CE groups. Linear discriminant 
analysis (LDA) identified Proteobacteria, Aminicenantales, and Chloroflexaceae 
as characteristic of CE, while Lactobacillus, Acinetobacter, Herbaspirillum, 
Ralstonia, Shewanela, and Micrococcaceae were associated with non-CE. CCA 
demonstrated associations between CE, adverse reproductive outcomes, and 
specific bacterial taxa. Microbial metabolic pathways significantly differed 
between CE and non-CE groups, with enrichment in pathways related to cofactors, 
vitamins, secondary metabolites, and the immune system in CE patients.
CONCLUSION: RIF patients with CE exhibit distinct endometrial microbiota 
compositions associated with adverse reproductive outcomes. The increased 
microbial diversity and altered metabolic pathways in CE suggest a potential 
correlation with reproductive outcomes, although further studies are necessary 
to elucidate the causal relationship between microbiota alterations and 
fertility. Modulating the endometrial microbiome may represent a novel 
therapeutic strategy to improve IVF outcomes in patients with CE.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12941-024-00710-6
PMCID: PMC11140900
PMID: 38816832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Pathog Immun. 2024 May 24;9(1):168-194. doi: 10.20411/pai.v9i1.693.
eCollection  2024.

The Gut and the Translocated Microbiomes in HIV Infection: Current Concepts and 
Future Avenues.

Nganou-Makamdop K(1), Douek DC(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Human Immunology Section, Vaccine Research Center, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland.

It is widely acknowledged that HIV infection results in disruption of the gut's 
mucosal integrity partly due a profound loss of gastrointestinal CD4+ T cells 
that are targets of the virus. In addition, systemic inflammation and immune 
activation that drive disease pathogenesis are reduced but not normalized by 
antiretroviral therapy (ART). It has long been postulated that through the 
process of microbial translocation, the gut microbiome acts as a key driver of 
systemic inflammation and immune recovery in HIV infection. As such, many 
studies have aimed at characterizing the gut microbiota in order to unravel its 
influence in people with HIV and have reported an association between various 
bacterial taxa and inflammation. This review assesses both contra-dictory and 
consistent findings among several studies in order to clarify the overall 
mechanisms by which the gut microbiota in adults may influence immune recovery 
in HIV infection. Independently of the gut microbiome, observations made from 
analysis of microbial products in the blood provide direct insight into how the 
translocated microbiome may drive immune recovery. To help better understand 
strengths and limitations of the findings reported, this review also highlights 
the numerous factors that can influence microbiome studies, be they experimental 
methodologies, and host-intrinsic or host-extrinsic factors. Altogether, a 
fuller understanding of the interplay between the gut microbiome and immunity in 
HIV infection may contribute to preventive and therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2024 Pathogens and Immunity.

DOI: 10.20411/pai.v9i1.693
PMCID: PMC11132393
PMID: 38807656

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.

1. Clin Pract. 2024 May 15;14(3):846-861. doi: 10.3390/clinpract14030066.

Alterations in the Gut Microbiome Composition of People Living with HIV in the 
Asia-Pacific Region: A Systematic Review.

Salvador PBU(1), Altavas PJDR(1), Del Rosario MAS(2), Ornos EDB(2)(3), Dalmacio 
LMM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, 
University of the Philippines Manila, Manila 1000, Philippines.
(2)Multi-Omics Research Program for Health, College of Medicine, University of 
the Philippines Manila, Manila 1000, Philippines.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, College of Public Health, University of 
the Philippines Manila, Manila 1000, Philippines.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection continues to present a global 
health issue. Recent studies have explored the potential role of the gut 
microbiome in HIV infection for novel therapeutic approaches. We investigated 
the gut microbiome composition of people living with HIV (PLHIV) in the 
Asia-Pacific region. This review was conducted following the Preferred Reporting 
Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guidelines. An 
electronic search was conducted in the PubMed/MEDLINE, Scopus, and ScienceDirect 
databases using keywords such as "HIV", "PLHIV", "AIDS", "gut microbiome", "gut 
dysbiosis", and "metagenomics". Only peer-reviewed and full-text studies 
published in English were included. A total of 15 studies from the Asia-Pacific 
region were included for analysis. Compared to healthy controls, PLHIV showed an 
increased abundance of Proteobacteria and its genera, which may be considered 
pathobionts, and decreased abundances of Bacteroidetes and several genera under 
Firmicutes with known short-chain fatty acid and immunoregulatory activities. 
Predominant taxa such as Ruminococcaceae and Prevotellaceae were also associated 
with clinical factors such as CD4 count, the CD4/CD8 ratio, and inflammatory 
cytokines. This review highlights gut microbiome changes among PLHIV in the 
Asia-Pacific region, indicating potential bacterial signatures for 
prognostication. The partial restoration of the microbiome toward beneficial 
taxa may ensure the long-term success of treatment, promoting immune recovery 
while maintaining viral load suppression.

DOI: 10.3390/clinpract14030066
PMCID: PMC11130874
PMID: 38804398

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no commercial 
or financial relationships associated with the conduct of this research which 
may be construed as potential conflicts of interest.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2357176. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2357176. 
Epub 2024 May 26.

The role of Bifidobacterium genus in modulating the neonate microbiota: 
implications for antibiotic resistance acquisition in early life.

Samarra A(1), Cabrera-Rubio R(1), Martínez-Costa C(2)(3), Collado MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Agrochemistry and Food Technology- 
National Research Council (IATA-CSIC), Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Valencia, 
Valencia, Spain.
(3)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Section, Hospital Clínico 
Universitario Valencia, Valencia, Spain.

Resistance to antibiotics in newborns is a huge concern as their immune system 
is still developing, and infections and resistance acquisition in early life 
have short- and long-term consequences for their health. Bifidobacterium species 
are important commensals capable of dominating the infant gut microbiome and are 
known to be less prone to possess antimicrobial resistance genes than other taxa 
that may colonize infants. We aimed to study the association between 
Bifidobacterium-dominated infant gut microbiota and the antibiotic resistant 
gene load in neonates, and to ascertain the perinatal factors that may 
contribute to the antibiotic resistance acquisition. Two hundred infant fecal 
samples at 7 days and 1 month of age from the MAMI birth cohort were included in 
the study and for whom maternal-neonatal clinical records were available. 
Microbiota profiling was carried out by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, and 
targeted antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) including tetM, tetW, tetO, blaTEM, 
blaSHV and ermB were quantified by qPCR. Infant microbiota clustered into two 
distinct groups according to their Bifidobacterium genus abundance: high and 
low. The main separation of groups or clusters at each time point was performed 
with an unsupervised non-linear algorithm of k-means partitioning to cluster 
data by time points based on Bifidobacterium genus relative abundance. 
Microbiota composition differed significantly between both groups, and specific 
bifidobacterial species were enriched in each cluster. Lower abundance of 
Bifidobacterium in the infant gut was associated with a higher load of 
antibiotic resistance genes. Our results highlight the relevance of 
Bifidobacterium genus in the early acquisition and establishment of antibiotic 
resistance in the gut. Further studies are needed to develop strategies to 
promote a healthy early colonization and fight against the spread of antibiotic 
resistances.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2357176
PMCID: PMC11135851
PMID: 38798019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. Mol Immunol. 2024 Jul;171:77-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2024.05.004. Epub 2024 
May 24.

Integrative analysis of systemic lupus erythematosus biomarkers: Role of fecal 
hsa-mir-223-3p and gut microbiota in transkingdom dynamics.

Quesada S(1), Rosso AD(2), Mascardi F(3), Soler-Rivero V(4), Aguilera P(5), 
Mascuka SN(4), Boiro A(6), Arenielo E(7), Vijoditz G(7), Ferreyra-Mufarregue 
LR(7), Caputo MF(7), Cimolai MC(8), Coluccio Leskow F(5), Penas-Steinhardt A(9), 
Belforte FS(10).

Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Genómica Computacional (GeC-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Programa del Estudio 
de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina.
(2)Laboratorio de Genómica Computacional (GeC-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Programa del Estudio 
de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina; Instituto de 
Ecología y Desarrollo Sustentable (INEDES-CONICET-UNLu), Departamento de 
Ciencias Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina.
(3)Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
Argentina; Instituto de Medicina Traslacional e Ingeniería Biomédica (IMTIB), 
CONICET, Instituto Universitario del Hospital Italiano (IUHI), Hospital Italiano 
de Buenos Aires (HIBA), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(4)Laboratorio de Genómica Computacional (GeC-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Programa del Estudio 
de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina.
(5)Programa del Estudio de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), 
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, 
Argentina; Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), 
Argentina.
(6)Laboratorio de Genómica Computacional (GeC-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina.
(7)Sección Inmunología, Hospital Nacional Profesor Alejandro Posadas, Buenos 
Aires, Argentina.
(8)Programa del Estudio de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), 
Departamento de Ciencias Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, 
Argentina.
(9)Laboratorio de Genómica Computacional (GeC-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Programa del Estudio 
de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina; Instituto 
Universitario de Ciencias de la Salud, Fundación H.A. Barceló, Ciudad Autónoma 
de Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(10)Laboratorio de Genómica Computacional (GeC-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Programa del Estudio 
de Comunicación y Señalización Interreino (PECSI-UNLu), Departamento de Ciencias 
Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina; Consejo Nacional de 
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Argentina; Instituto de 
Ecología y Desarrollo Sustentable (INEDES-CONICET-UNLu), Departamento de 
Ciencias Básicas, Universidad Nacional de Luján, Luján, Argentina. Electronic 
address: fiorellabelforte@gmail.com.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) involves a florid set of clinical 
manifestations whose autoreactive origin is characterized by an overactivation 
of the immune system and the production of a large number of autoantibodies. 
Because it is a complex pathology with an inflammatory component, its 
pathogenesis is not yet fully understood, assuming both genetic and 
environmental predisposing factors. Currently, it is known that the role of the 
human microbiome is crucial in maintaining the transkingdom balance between 
commensal microorganisms and the immune system. In the present work we study the 
intestinal microbiota of Argentine patients with different stages of SLE 
receiving or not different treatments. Microbiota composition and fecal miRNAs 
were assessed by 16 S sequencing and qPCR. hsa-miR-223-3p, a miRNA involved in 
several inflammation regulation pathways, was found underexpressed in SLE 
patients without immunosuppressive treatment. In terms of microbiota there were 
clear differences in population structure (Weighted and Unweighted Unifrac 
distances, p-value <0.05) and core microbiome between cases and controls. In 
addition, Collinsella, Bifidobacterium, Streptococcus genera and aromatics 
degradation metabolisms were overrepresented in the SLE group. Medical treatment 
was also determinant as several microbial metabolic pathways were influenced by 
immunosuppressive therapy. Particularly, allantoin degradation metabolism was 
differentially expressed in the group of patients receiving immunosuppressants. 
Finally, we performed a logistic regression model (LASSO: least absolute 
shrinkage and selection operator) considering the expression levels of the fecal 
hsa-miR223-3p; the core microbiota; the differentially abundant bacterial taxa 
and the differentially abundant metabolic pathways (p<0.05). The model predicted 
that SLE patients could be associated with greater relative abundance of the 
formaldehyde oxidation pathway (RUMP_PWY). On the contrary, the preponderance of 
the ketodeoxyoctonate (Kdo) biosynthesis and activation route (PWY_1269) and the 
genera Lachnospiraceae_UCG_004, Lachnospira, Victivallis and UCG_003 (genus 
belonging to the family Oscillospiraceae of the class Clostridia) were 
associated with a control phenotype. Overall, the present work could contribute 
to the development of integral diagnostic tools for the comprehensive 
phenotyping of patients with SLE. In this sense, studying the commensal 
microbial profile and possible pathobionts associated with SLE in our population 
proposes more effective and precise strategies to explore possible treatments 
based on the microbiota of SLE patients.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2024.05.004
PMID: 38795687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement All authors 
declare no competing interest.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 May 3;15:1387957. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1387957. 
eCollection 2024.

Hybridization alters red deer gut microbiome and metabolites.

Wei L(1)(2), Zeng B(3), Li B(4), Guo W(5), Mu Z(1), Gan Y(5), Li Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of High Active Traditional Chinese Drug Delivery 
System, Chongqing Medical and Pharmaceutical College, Chongqing, China.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Farm Animal Genetic Resources Exploration and Innovation Key Laboratory of 
Sichuan Province, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.
(4)College of Resources and Environment, Aba Teachers University, Aba, China.
(5)School of Laboratory Medicine, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Ministry of Education & Key 
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology of Guizhou Province, & Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Endemic and Ethnic Regional 
Diseases Co-constructed by the Province and Ministry, Guizhou Medical 
University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.

The host genes play a crucial role in shaping the composition and structure of 
the gut microbiome. Red deer is listed as an endangered species by the 
International Union for the Conservation of Nature, and its pilose antlers have 
good medicinal value. Hybridization can lead to heterosis, resulting in 
increased pilose antler production and growth performance in hybrid deer. 
However, the role of the gut microbiome in hybrid deer remains largely unknown. 
In this study, alpha and beta diversity analysis showed that hybridization 
altered the composition and structure of the gut microbiome of the offspring, 
with the composition and structure of the hybrid offspring being more similar to 
those of the paternal parents. Interestingly, the LefSe differential analysis 
showed that there were some significantly enriched gut microbiome in the 
paternal parents (such as g_Prevotellaceae UCG-003, f_Bacteroidales RF16 group; 
Ambiguous_taxa, etc.) and the maternal parents (including g_Alistipes, 
g_Anaerosporobacter, etc.), which remained significantly enriched in the hybrid 
offspring. Additionally, the hybrid offspring exhibited a significant advantage 
over the parental strains, particularly in taxa that can produce short-chain 
fatty acids, such as g_Prevotellaceae UCG-003, g_Roseburia, g_Succinivibrio, and 
g_Lachnospiraceae UCG-006. Similar to bacterial transmission, metagenomic 
analysis showed that some signaling pathways related to pilose antler growth 
("Wnt signaling pathway," "PI3K Akt signaling pathway," "MAPK signaling 
pathway") were also enriched in hybrid red deer after hybridization. 
Furthermore, metabolomic analysis revealed that compared with the paternal and 
maternal parents, the hybrid offspring exhibited significant enrichment in 
metabolites related to "Steroid hormone biosynthesis," "Tryptophan metabolism," 
"Valine, leucine and isoleucine metabolism," and "Vitamin B metabolism." 
Notably, the metagenomic analysis also showed that these metabolic pathways were 
significantly enriched in hybrid deer. Finally, a correlation analysis between 
the gut microbiome and metabolites revealed a significant positive correlation 
between the enriched taxa in hybrid deer, including the Bacteroidales RF16 
group, Prevotellaceae, and Succinivibrio, and metabolites, such as 
7α-hydroxytestosterone, L-kynurenine, indole, L-isoleucine, and riboflavin. The 
study contributes valuable data toward understanding the role of the gut 
microbiome from red deer in hybridization and provides reference data for 
further screening potential probiotics and performing microbial-assisted 
breeding that promotes the growth of red deer pilose antlers and bodies, 
development, and immunity.

Copyright © 2024 Wei, Zeng, Li, Guo, Mu, Gan and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1387957
PMCID: PMC11112572
PMID: 38784815

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 May 8;14:1341545. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2024.1341545. eCollection 2024.

Crosstalk between human immunodeficiency virus infection and salivary bacterial 
function in men who have sex with men.

Guo Y(#)(1), Wang W(#)(2), Yu Y(1), Sun X(1), Zhang B(1), Wang Y(1), Cao J(1), 
Wen S(1), Wang X(1), Li Y(1), Cai S(3), Wu R(4), Duan W(2), Xia W(2), Wei F(5), 
Duan J(2), Dong H(6), Guo S(5), Zhang F(7), Sun Z(8), Huang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Stomatology, Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Clinical and Research Center for Infectious Diseases, Beijing Youan Hospital, 
Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(3)Center for Clinical Epidemiology and Evidence-Based Medicine, Beijing 
Children's Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, MA, United States.
(5)Beijing Institute of Hepatology, Beijing Youan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(6)Department of Stomatology, Beijing Daxing District Hospital of Integrated 
Chinese and Western Medicine, Beijing, China.
(7)Department of Periodontology, Beijing Stomatological Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, China.
(8)Department of Oral Medicine, Beijing Stomatological Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Engaging in anal sexual intercourse markedly increases the risk of 
developing HIV among men who have sex with men (MSM); oral sexual activities 
tend to uniquely introduce gut-derived microbes to salivary microbiota, which, 
combined with an individual's positive HIV status, may greatly perturb oral 
microecology. However, till date, only a few published studies have addressed 
this aspect.
METHODS: Based on 16S rRNA sequencing data of bacterial taxa, MicroPITA picks 
representative samples for metagenomic analysis, effectively revealing how the 
development and progression of the HIV disease influences oral microbiota in 
MSM. Therefore, we collected samples from 11 HIV-negative and 44 HIV-positive 
MSM subjects (stage 0 was defined by HIV RNA positivity, but negative or 
indeterminate antibody status; stages 1, 2, and 3 were defined by CD4+ T 
lymphocyte counts ≥ 500, 200-499, and ≤ 200 or opportunistic infection) and 
selected 25 representative saliva samples (5 cases/stage) using MicroPITA. 
Metagenomic sequencing analysis were performed to explore whether positive HIV 
status changes salivary bacterial KEGG function and metabolic pathway in MSM.
RESULTS: The core functions of oral microbiota were maintained across each of 
the five groups, including metabolism, genetic and environmental information 
processing. All HIV-positive groups displayed KEGG functions of abnormal 
proliferation, most prominently at stage 0, and others related to metabolism. 
Clustering relationship analysis tentatively identified functional relationships 
between groups, with bacterial function being more similar between stage 
0-control groups and stage 1-2 groups, whereas the stage 3 group exhibited large 
functional changes. Although we identified most metabolic pathways as being 
common to all five groups, several unique pathways formed clusters for certain 
groups; the stage 0 group had several, while the stage 2 and 3 groups had few, 
such clusters. The abundance of K03046 was positively correlated with CD4 
counts.
CONCLUSION: As HIV progresses, salivary bacterial function and metabolic 
pathways in MSM progressively changes, which may be related to HIV promoting 
abnormal energy metabolism and exacerbate pathogen virulence. Further, infection 
and drug resistance of acute stage and immune cell destruction of AIDS stage 
were abnormally increased, predicting an increased risk for MSM individuals to 
develop systemic and oral diseases.

Copyright © 2024 Guo, Wang, Yu, Sun, Zhang, Wang, Cao, Wen, Wang, Li, Cai, Wu, 
Duan, Xia, Wei, Duan, Dong, Guo, Zhang, Sun and Huang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2024.1341545
PMCID: PMC11109444
PMID: 38779561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Mol Biol Rep. 2024 May 22;51(1):666. doi: 10.1007/s11033-024-09629-9.

Contrasting gut bacteriomes unveiled between wild Antheraea assamensis Helfer 
(Lepidoptera: Saturniidae) and domesticated Bombyx mori L. (Lepidoptera: 
Bombycidae) silkworms.

Subrahmanyam G(1), Thirupathaiah Y(2), Vijay N(3), Debnath R(4), Arunkumar 
KP(3), Gadwala M(2), Sangannavar PA(5), Manthira Moorthy S(4), Chutia M(6).

Author information:
(1)Seri-biotech Research Laboratory, Central Silk Board, Ministry of Textiles, 
Govt. of India, Kodathi, Carmelram Post, Bangalore, Karnataka, 560035, India. 
subrahmanyamg.csb@gov.in.
(2)Central Sericultural Research & Training Institute, Central Silk Board, 
Manandawadi Road, Srirampura, Mysore, Karnataka, 570008, India.
(3)Central Muga Eri Research & Training Institute, Central Silk Board, Ministry 
of Textiles, Govt. of India, Lahdoigarh, Jorhat, Assam, 785700, India.
(4)Seri-biotech Research Laboratory, Central Silk Board, Ministry of Textiles, 
Govt. of India, Kodathi, Carmelram Post, Bangalore, Karnataka, 560035, India.
(5)Central Silk Board, Ministry of Textiles, Govt. of India, B.T.M. Layout, 
Madivala, Bangalore, Karnataka, 560068, India.
(6)Muga Eri Silkworm Seed Organization, Central Silk Board, Reshom Nagar, 
Khanapara, Guwahati, Assam, 781022, India.

BACKGROUND: Insect gut microbiomes play a fundamental role in various aspects of 
insect physiology, including digestion, nutrient metabolism, detoxification, 
immunity, growth and development. The wild Muga silkworm, Antheraea 
assamensis Helfer holds significant economic importance, as it produces golden 
silk.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In the current investigation, we deciphered its intricate 
gut bacteriome through high-throughput 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. Further, to 
understand bacterial community dynamics among silkworms raised under outdoor 
environmental conditions, we compared its gut bacteriomes with those of the 
domesticated mulberry silkworm, Bombyx mori L. Most abundant bacterial phyla 
identified in the gut of A. assamensis were Proteobacteria (78.1%), 
Bacteroidetes (8.0%) and Firmicutes (6.6%), whereas the most-abundant phyla 
in B. mori were Firmicutes (49-86%) and Actinobacteria (10-36%). Further, 
Gammaproteobacteria (57.1%), Alphaproteobacteria (10.47%) and Betaproteobacteria 
(8.28%) were the dominant bacterial classes found in the gut of A. assamensis. 
The predominant bacterial families in A. assamensis gut 
were Enterobacteriaceae (27.7%), Comamonadaceae (9.13%), Pseudomonadaceae (9.08%) Flavobacteriaceae (7.59%) Moraxellaceae (7.38%) Alteromonadaceae (6.8%) 
and Enterococcaceae (4.46%). In B. mori, the most-abundant bacterial families 
were Peptostreptococcaceae, Enterococcaceae, Lactobacillaceae and 
Bifidobacteriaceae, though all showed great variability among the samples. The 
core gut bacteriome of A. assamensis consisted of Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, 
Variovorax, Myroides, Alteromonas, Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Sphingomonas, 
Brevundimonas, Oleispira, Comamonas, Oleibacter Vagococcus, Aminobacter, 
Marinobacter, Cupriavidus, Aeromonas, and Bacillus. Comparative gut bacteriome 
analysis revealed a more complex gut bacterial diversity in wild A. 
assamensis silkworms than in domesticated B. mori silkworms, which contained a 
relatively simple gut bacteriome as estimated by OTU richness. Predictive 
functional profiling of the gut bacteriome suggested that gut bacteria in A. 
assamensis were associated with a wide range of physiological, nutritional, and 
metabolic functions, including biodegradation of xenobiotics, lipid, amino acid, 
carbohydrate metabolism, and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and amino 
acids.
CONCLUSIONS: These results showed great differences in the composition and 
diversity of gut bacteria between the two silkworm species. Both insect species 
harbored core bacterial taxa commonly found in insects, but the relative 
abundance and composition of these taxa varied markedly.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-024-09629-9
PMID: 38777963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. World J Clin Cases. 2024 May 16;12(14):2293-2300. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v12.i14.2293.

Bringing gut microbiota into the spotlight of clinical research and medical 
practice.

Davoutis E(1), Gkiafi Z(1), Lykoudis PM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens 
11527, Greece.
(2)Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, University College London, 
London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom. p.lykoudis@ucl.ac.uk.

Despite the increasing scientific interest and expanding role of gut microbiota 
(GM) in human health, it is rarely reported in case reports and deployed in 
clinical practice. Proteins and metabolites produced by microbiota contribute to 
immune system development, energy homeostasis and digestion. Exo- and endogenous 
factors can alter its composition. Disturbance of microbiota, also known as 
dysbiosis, is associated with various pathological conditions. Specific 
bacterial taxa and related metabolites are involved in disease pathogenesis and 
therefore can serve as a diagnostic tool. GM could also be a useful prognostic 
factor by predicting future disease onset and preventing hospital-associated 
infections. Additionally, it can influence response to treatments, including 
those for cancers, by altering drug bioavailability. A thorough understanding of 
its function has permitted significant development in therapeutics, such as 
probiotics and fecal transplantation. Hence, GM should be considered as a 
ground-breaking biological parameter, and it is advisable to be investigated and 
reported in literature in a more consistent and systematic way.

©The Author(s) 2024. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v12.i14.2293
PMCID: PMC11099419
PMID: 38765739

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the Authors 
have no conflict of interest related to the manuscript.

1. mSphere. 2024 Jun 25;9(6):e0019624. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00196-24. Epub 2024
May  14.

A shared group of bacterial taxa in the duodenal microbiota of undernourished 
Pakistani children with environmental enteric dysfunction.

Iqbal NT(1)(2), Chen RY(3)(4), Griffin NW(3)(4), Hibberd MC(3)(4), Khalid A(1), 
Sadiq K(1), Jamil Z(2), Ahmed K(1), Iqbal J(1), Hotwani A(1), Kabir F(1), Rahman 
N(1), Rizvi A(1), Idress R(5), Ahmed Z(5), Ahmed S(1), Umrani F(1), Syed 
S(1)(6), Moore SR(6), Ali A(1), Barratt MJ(3)(4), Gordon JI(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)The Edison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Center for Gut Microbiome and Nutrition Research, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(6)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Department 
of Pediatrics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

Environmental enteric dysfunction (EED) is a subclinical syndrome of altered 
small intestinal function postulated to be an important contributor to childhood 
undernutrition. The role of small intestinal bacterial communities in the 
pathophysiology of EED is poorly defined due to a paucity of studies where there 
has been a direct collection of small intestinal samples from undernourished 
children. Sixty-three members of a Pakistani cohort identified as being acutely 
malnourished between 3 and 6 months of age and whose wasting (weight-for-length 
Z-score [WLZ]) failed to improve after a 2-month nutritional intervention 
underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). Paired duodenal luminal aspirates 
and duodenal mucosal biopsies were obtained from 43 children. Duodenal 
microbiota composition was characterized by sequencing bacterial 16S rRNA gene 
amplicons. Levels of bacterial taxa (amplicon sequence variants [ASVs]) were 
referenced to anthropometric indices, histopathologic severity in biopsies, 
expression of selected genes in the duodenal mucosa, and fecal levels of an 
immunoinflammatory biomarker (lipocalin-2). A "core" group of eight bacterial 
ASVs was present in the duodenal samples of 69% of participants. Streptococcus 
anginosus was the most prevalent, followed by Streptococcus sp., Gemella 
haemolysans, Streptococcus australis, Granulicatella elegans, Granulicatella 
adiacens, and Abiotrophia defectiva. At the time of EGD, none of the core taxa 
were significantly correlated with WLZ. Statistically significant correlations 
were documented between the abundances of Granulicatella elegans and 
Granulicatella adiacens and the expression of duodenal mucosal genes involved in 
immune responses (dual oxidase maturation factor 2, serum amyloid A, and 
granzyme H). These results suggest that a potential role for members of the oral 
microbiota in pathogenesis, notably Streptococcus, Gemella, and Granulicatella 
species, warrants further investigation.IMPORTANCEUndernutrition among women and 
children is a pressing global health problem. Environmental enteric dysfunction 
(EED) is a disease of the small intestine (SI) associated with impaired gut 
mucosal barrier function and reduced capacity for nutrient absorption. The cause 
of EED is ill-defined. One emerging hypothesis is that alterations in the SI 
microbiota contribute to EED. We performed a culture-independent analysis of the 
SI microbiota of a cohort of Pakistani children with undernutrition who had 
failed a standard nutritional intervention, underwent upper gastrointestinal 
tract endoscopy, and had histologic evidence of EED in their duodenal mucosal 
biopsies. The results revealed a shared group of bacterial taxa in their 
duodenums whose absolute abundances were correlated with levels of the 
expression of genes in the duodenal mucosa that are involved in inflammatory 
responses. A number of these bacterial taxa are more typically found in the oral 
microbiota, a finding that has potential physiologic and therapeutic 
implications.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00196-24
PMCID: PMC11332341
PMID: 38742887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 May 10;14(1):10702. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-61299-6.

Effects of Eimeria acervulina infection on the luminal and mucosal microbiota of 
the cecum and ileum in broiler chickens.

Campos PM(1)(2)(3), Miska KB(3), Jenkins MC(4), Yan X(5), Proszkowiec-Weglarz 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE), USDA-ARS Research 
Participation Program, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
(2)USDA-ARS, NEA Bioinformatics, Beltsville, MD, USA.
(3)USDA-ARS, NEA, Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Animal Biosciences 
and Biotechnology Laboratory, 10300 Baltimore Avenue, B-307, Rm. 335, BARC-East, 
Beltsville, MD, 20705, USA.
(4)USDA-ARS, NEA, Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Animal Parasitic 
Diseases Laboratory, Beltsville, MD, USA.
(5)USDA-ARS, NEA, Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Environmental 
Microbial and Food Safety Laboratory, Beltsville, MD, USA.
(6)USDA-ARS, NEA, Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Animal Biosciences 
and Biotechnology Laboratory, 10300 Baltimore Avenue, B-307, Rm. 335, BARC-East, 
Beltsville, MD, 20705, USA. monika.weglarz@usda.gov.

Coccidiosis, an intestinal disease caused by Eimeria parasites, is responsible 
for major losses in the poultry industry by impacting chicken health. The gut 
microbiota is associated with health factors, such as nutrient exchange and 
immune system modulation, requiring understanding on the effects of Eimeria 
infection on the gut microbiota. This study aimed to determine the effects of 
Eimeria acervulina infection on the luminal and mucosal microbiota of the cecum 
(CeL and CeM) and ileum (IlL and IlM) at multiple time points (days 3, 5, 7, 10, 
and 14) post-infection. E. acervulina infection decreased evenness in CeL 
microbiota at day 10, increased richness in CeM microbiota at day 3 before 
decreasing richness at day 14, and decreased richness in IlL microbiota from day 
3 to 10. CeL, CeM, and IlL microbiota differed between infected and control 
birds based on beta diversity at varying time points. Infection reduced relative 
abundance of bacterial taxa and some predicted metabolic pathways known for 
short-chain fatty acid production in CeL, CeM, and IlL microbiota, but further 
understanding of metabolic function is required. Despite E. acervulina primarily 
targeting the duodenum, our findings demonstrate the infection can impact 
bacterial diversity and abundance in the cecal and ileal microbiota.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-61299-6
PMCID: PMC11087572
PMID: 38729976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Infect Dis. 2024 May 8:jiae247. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiae247. Online ahead of
 print.

Clinical and Microbial Determinants of Upper Respiratory Colonization with 
Streptococcus pneumoniae and Native Microbiota in People with HIV-1 and Control 
Adults.

Nicholson LK(1)(2)(3), Kofonow JM(1)(2), Robertson CE(1)(2), Wright T(4), Li 
Q(2), Gardner EM(2)(4), Frank DN(1)(2), Janoff EN(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Mucosal and Vaccine Research Program Colorado (MAVRC), USA.
(2)University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Denver VA Medical Center, Denver, CO, USA.
(4)Denver Health and Hospital Authority, Denver, CO, USA.

BACKGROUND: The substantial risk for respiratory and invasive infections with 
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn) among people with HIV-1 (PWH) begins with 
asymptomatic colonization. The frequency of Spn colonization among U.S. adults 
with and without HIV-1 infection is not well-characterized in the conjugate 
vaccine era.
METHODS: We determined Spn colonization frequency by culture and specific lytA 
gene QPCR and microbiota profile by 16S rRNA gene sequencing in nasopharyngeal 
(NP) and oropharyngeal (OP) DNA from 138 PWH and 93 control adults and 
associated clinical characteristics.
RESULTS: The frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls did not 
differ (11.6% vs 8.6%, respectively; p=0.46) using combined results of culture 
and PCR, independent of vaccination or behavioral risks. PWH showed altered 
microbiota composition (i.e., beta-diversity. NP: p=0.0028, OP: p=0.0098), 
decreased alpha-diversity (NP: p=0.024, OP: p=0.0045), and differences in the 
relative abundance of multiple bacterial taxa. Spn colonization was associated 
with altered beta-diversity in the NP (p=0.011), but not OP (p=0.21).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite widespread conjugate vaccine and antiretroviral use, 
frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls are currently consistent 
with those reported in the pre-conjugate era. The persistently increased risk of 
pneumococcal disease despite ART may relate to behavioral and immunologic 
variables other than colonization.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For commercial 
re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiae247
PMID: 38718217

1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2024 Mar 28;17(4):432. doi: 10.3390/ph17040432.

Discovery of Bacterial Key Genes from 16S rRNA-Seq Profiles That Are Associated 
with the Complications of SARS-CoV-2 Infections and Provide Therapeutic 
Indications.

Kibria MK(1)(2), Ali MA(1)(3), Yaseen M(4), Khan IA(5), Bhat MA(6), Islam MA(1), 
Mahumud RA(7), Mollah MNH(1).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Laboratory, Department of Statistics, University of Rajshahi, 
Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Statistics, Hajee Mohammad Danesh Science and Technology 
University, Dinajpur 5200, Bangladesh.
(3)Department of Chemistry, University of Rajshahi, Rajshahi 6205, Bangladesh.
(4)Institute of Chemical Sciences, University of Swat, Main Campus, Charbagh 
19130, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Government College University, Faisalabad 38000, 
Pakistan.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, Riyadh 11421, Saudi Arabia.
(7)NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University 
of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2006, Australia.

SARS-CoV-2 infections, commonly referred to as COVID-19, remain a critical risk 
to both human life and global economies. Particularly, COVID-19 patients with 
weak immunity may suffer from different complications due to the bacterial 
co-infections/super-infections/secondary infections. Therefore, different 
variants of alternative antibacterial therapeutic agents are required to inhibit 
those infection-causing drug-resistant pathogenic bacteria. This study attempted 
to explore these bacterial pathogens and their inhibitors by using integrated 
statistical and bioinformatics approaches. By analyzing bacterial 16S rRNA 
sequence profiles, at first, we detected five bacterial genera and taxa 
(Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, Prevotella Clostridium, Atopobium, and 
Peptostreptococcus) based on differentially abundant bacteria between SARS-CoV-2 
infection and control samples that are significantly enriched in 23 metabolic 
pathways. A total of 183 bacterial genes were found in the enriched pathways. 
Then, the top-ranked 10 bacterial genes (accB, ftsB, glyQ, hldD, lpxC, lptD, 
mlaA, ppsA, ppc, and tamB) were selected as the pathogenic bacterial key genes 
(bKGs) by their protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis. Then, we 
detected bKG-guided top-ranked eight drug molecules (Bemcentinib, Ledipasvir, 
Velpatasvir, Tirilazad, Acetyldigitoxin, Entreatinib, Digitoxin, and Elbasvir) 
by molecular docking. Finally, the binding stability of the top-ranked three 
drug molecules (Bemcentinib, Ledipasvir, and Velpatasvir) against three 
receptors (hldD, mlaA, and lptD) was investigated by computing their binding 
free energies with molecular dynamic (MD) simulation-based MM-PBSA techniques, 
respectively, and was found to be stable. Therefore, the findings of this study 
could be useful resources for developing a proper treatment plan against 
bacterial co-/super-/secondary-infection in SARS-CoV-2 infections.

DOI: 10.3390/ph17040432
PMCID: PMC11053588
PMID: 38675393

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2024 Apr 17;13(4):472. doi: 10.3390/antiox13040472.

Tributyrin Supplementation Rescues Chronic-Binge Ethanol-Induced Oxidative 
Stress in the Gut-Lung Axis in Mice.

Santilli A(1), Shapiro D(1), Han Y(1), Sangwan N(2)(3)(4), Cresci GAM(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Inflammation and Immunity, Lerner Research Institute, 
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(2)Microbial Sequencing & Analytics Resource (MSAAR) Facility, Shared Laboratory 
Resources (SLR), Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(3)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(4)Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine, Case Western Reserve University, 
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Digestive Disease 
Institute, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Excessive alcohol consumption increases the severity and worsens outcomes of 
pulmonary infections, often due to oxidative stress and tissue damage. While the 
mechanism behind this relationship is multifaceted, recent evidence suggests 
ethanol-induced changes to the gut microbiome impact the gut-lung axis. To 
assess this, a chronic-binge ethanol feeding mouse model was used to determine 
how ethanol altered the gut microbiome, small intestinal epithelial barrier, and 
immune responses, as well as neutrophil abundance and oxidative stress in the 
lungs, and how supporting gut health with tributyrin supplementation during 
chronic-binge ethanol exposure affected these responses. We found that ethanol 
consumption altered gut bacterial taxa and metabolic processes, distorted small 
intestinal immune responses, and induced both bacteria and endotoxin 
translocation into the lymphatic and circulatory systems. These changes were 
associated with increased neutrophil (Ly6G) presence and markers of oxidative 
stress, lipocalin-2 and myeloperoxidase, in the lungs. Importantly, tributyrin 
supplementation during ethanol exposure rescued gut bacterial function (p < 
0.05), small intestinal barrier integrity, and immune responses, as well as 
reducing both Ly6G mRNA (p < 0.05) and lipocalin-2 mRNA (p < 0.01) in the lungs. 
These data suggest ethanol-associated disruption of gut homeostasis influenced 
the health of the lungs, and that therapeutics supporting gut health may also 
support lung health.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox13040472
PMCID: PMC11047693
PMID: 38671919

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2024 Jul;103(7):1271-1282. doi: 10.1111/aogs.14847.
 Epub 2024 Apr 25.

Comparative analysis of endometrial, vaginal, and gut microbiota in patients 
with and without adenomyosis.

Valdés-Bango M(1), Gracia M(1), Rubio E(2), Vergara A(2)(3)(4), Casals-Pascual 
C(2)(3)(4), Ros C(1), Rius M(1), Martínez-Zamora MÁ(1), Mension E(1), Quintas 
L(1), Carmona F(1).

Author information:
(1)Endometriosis Unit, Gynecology Department, Institute Clinic of Gynecology, 
Obstetrics and Neonatology (ICGON), Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Hospital Clinic of Barcelona, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Barcelona Institute for Global Health (ISGlobal), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)CIBER Enfermedades Infecciosas (CIBERINFEC), Instituto Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Alterations in microbiota composition have been implicated in a 
variety of human diseases. Patients with adenomyosis present immune 
dysregulation leading to a persistent chronic inflammatory response. In this 
context, the hypothesis that alterations in the microbiota may be involved in 
the pathogenesis of adenomyosis, by affecting the epigenetic, immunologic, and 
biochemical functions of the host, has recently been postulated. The aim of the 
present study was to compare the microbiota composition in the vagina, 
endometrium, and gut of individuals with and without adenomyosis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cross-sectional study including 38 adenomyosis patients 
and 46 controls, performed between September 2021 and October 2022 in a 
university hospital-based research center. The diagnosis of adenomyosis was 
based on sonographic criteria. Fecal, vaginal, and endometrial samples were 
collected. Study of the microbiota using 16S rRNA gene sequencing.
RESULTS: Patients with adenomyosis exhibited a significant reduction in the gut 
microbial alpha diversity compared with healthy controls (Chao1 p = 0.012, 
Fisher p = 0.005, Observed species p = 0.005). Beta-diversity analysis showed 
significant differences in the compositions of both gut and vaginal microbiota 
between adenomyosis patients and the control group (Adonis p-value = 0.001; 
R2 = 0.03 and Adonis p-value = 0.034; R2 = 0.04 respectively). Specific 
bacterial taxa were found to be either overrepresented (Rhodospirillales, 
Ruminococcus gauvreauii group, Ruminococcaceae, and Actinomyces) or 
underrepresented in the gut and endometrial microbiota of adenomyosis patients 
compared with controls. Distinct microbiota profiles were identified among 
patients with internal and external adenomyosis phenotypes.
CONCLUSIONS: The study revealed reduced gut microbiota diversity in adenomyosis 
patients, accompanied by distinct compositions in gut and vaginal microbiota 
compared with controls. Overrepresented or underrepresented bacterial taxa were 
noted in the gut and endometrial microbiota of adenomyosis patients, with 
variations in microbiota profiles among those with internal and external 
adenomyosis phenotypes. These findings suggest a potential association between 
microbiota and adenomyosis, indicating the need for further research to 
comprehensively understand the implications of these differences.

© 2024 The Authors. Acta Obstetricia et Gynecologica Scandinavica published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology (NFOG).

DOI: 10.1111/aogs.14847
PMCID: PMC11168268
PMID: 38661227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest to declare.

1. Environ Int. 2024 Apr;186:108639. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108639. Epub 2024
 Apr 7.

Airborne antibiotic resistome and microbiome in pharmaceutical factories.

Bai H(1), He LY(2), Gao FZ(1), Yao KS(3), Zhang M(4), Qiao LK(1), Chen ZY(1), He 
LX(1), Liu YS(1), Zhao JL(1), Ying GG(5).

Author information:
(1)SCNU Environmental Research Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Pollution and Environmental Safety & MOE Key Laboratory of Theoretical 
Chemistry of Environment, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, 
China; School of Environment, South China Normal University, University Town, 
Guangzhou 510006, China.
(2)SCNU Environmental Research Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Pollution and Environmental Safety & MOE Key Laboratory of Theoretical 
Chemistry of Environment, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, 
China; School of Environment, South China Normal University, University Town, 
Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address: liangying.he@m.scnu.edu.cn.
(3)Aquatic Ecology and Water Quality Management group, Wageningen University, 
P.O. Box 47, 6700 AA Wageningen, the Netherlands.
(4)Pearl River Water Resources Research Institute, Pearl River Water Resources 
Commission of the Ministry of Water Resources, Guangzhou 510610, China.
(5)SCNU Environmental Research Institute, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of 
Chemical Pollution and Environmental Safety & MOE Key Laboratory of Theoretical 
Chemistry of Environment, South China Normal University, Guangzhou 510006, 
China; School of Environment, South China Normal University, University Town, 
Guangzhou 510006, China. Electronic address: guangguo.ying@m.scnu.edu.cn.

Antimicrobial resistance is considered to be one of the biggest public health 
problems, and airborne transmission is an important but under-appreciated 
pathway for the spread of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) in the environment. 
Previous research has shown pharmaceutical factories to be a major source of 
ARGs and antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB) in the surrounding receiving water 
and soil environments. Pharmaceutical factories are hotspots of antibiotic 
resistance, but the atmospheric transmission and its environmental risk remain 
more concerns. Here, we conducted a metagenomic investigation into the airborne 
microbiome and resistome in three pharmaceutical factories in China. Soil 
(average: 38.45%) and wastewater (average: 28.53%) were major contributors of 
airborne resistome. ARGs (vanR/vanS, blaOXA, and CfxA) conferring resistance to 
critically important clinically used antibiotics were identified in the air 
samples. The wastewater treatment area had significantly higher relative 
abundances of ARGs (average: 0.64 copies/16S rRNA). Approximately 28.2% of the 
detected airborne ARGs were found to be associated with plasmids, and this 
increased to about 50% in the wastewater treatment area. We have compiled a list 
of high-risk airborne ARGs found in pharmaceutical factories. Moreover, A total 
of 1,043 viral operational taxonomic units were identified and linked to 47 
family-group taxa. Different CRISPR-Cas immune systems have been identified in 
bacterial hosts in response to phage infection. Similarly, higher phage 
abundance (average: 2451.70 PPM) was found in the air of the wastewater 
treatment area. Our data provide insights into the antibiotic resistance gene 
profiles and microbiome (bacterial and non-bacterial) in pharmaceutical 
factories and reveal the potential role of horizontal transfer in the spread of 
airborne ARGs, with implications for human and animal health.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108639
PMID: 38603815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. World J Clin Pediatr. 2024 Mar 9;13(1):90755. doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v13.i1.90755. 
eCollection 2024 Mar 9.

Gut microbiota predicts the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis in Saudi children.

El Mouzan M(1), Al Sarkhy A(2), Assiri A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology Unit, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11461, Saudi Arabia. melmouzan@ksu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology Unit, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11461, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an immune-mediated chronic inflammatory 
condition with a worldwide distribution. Although the etiology of this disease 
is still unknown, the understanding of the role of the microbiota is becoming 
increasingly strong.
AIM: To investigate the predictive power of the gut microbiota for the diagnosis 
of UC in a cohort of newly diagnosed treatment-naïve Saudi children with UC.
METHODS: The study population included 20 children with a confirmed diagnosis of 
UC and 20 healthy controls. Microbial DNA was extracted and sequenced, and 
shotgun metagenomic analysis was performed for bacteria and bacteriophages. 
Biostatistics and bioinformatics demonstrated significant dysbiosis in the form 
of reduced alpha diversity, beta diversity, and significant difference of 
abundance of taxa between children with UC and control groups. The receiver 
operating characteristic curve, a probability curve, was used to determine the 
difference between the UC and control groups. The area under the curve (AUC) 
represents the degree of separability between the UC group and the control 
group. The AUC was calculated for all identified bacterial species and for 
bacterial species identified by the random forest classification algorithm as 
important potential biomarkers of UC. A similar method of AUC calculation for 
all bacteriophages and important species was used.
RESULTS: The median age and range were 14 (0.5-21) and 12.9 (6.8-16.3) years for 
children with UC and controls, respectively, and 40% and 35% were male for 
children with UC and controls, respectively. The AUC for all identified 
bacterial species was 89.5%. However, when using the bacterial species 
identified as important by random forest classification algorithm analysis, the 
accuracy increased to 97.6%. Similarly, the AUC for all the identified 
bacteriophages was 87.4%, but this value increased to 94.5% when the important 
bacteriophage biomarkers were used.
CONCLUSION: The very high to excellent AUCs of fecal bacterial and viral species 
suggest the potential use of noninvasive microbiota-based tests for the 
diagnosis of unusual cases of UC in children. In addition, the identification of 
important bacteria and bacteriophages whose abundance is reduced in children 
with UC suggests the potential of preventive and adjuvant microbial therapy for 
UC.

©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.5409/wjcp.v13.i1.90755
PMCID: PMC11000067
PMID: 38596448

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All authors have 
no conflicts of interest to disclose.

1. Geroscience. 2024 Dec;46(6):5767-5780. doi: 10.1007/s11357-024-01147-7. Epub 
2024 Apr 8.

Reduced insulin/IGF-1 signalling upregulates two anti-viral immune pathways, 
decreases viral load and increases survival under viral infection in C. elegans.

Duxbury EML(1), Carlsson H(2), Kimberley A(2), Ridge Y(2), Johnson K(2), 
Maklakov AA(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK. 
E.Duxbury@uea.ac.uk.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.

Reduced insulin/IGF-1 signalling (rIIS) improves survival across diverse taxa 
and there is a growing interest in its role in regulating immune function. 
Whilst rIIS can improve anti-bacterial resistance, the consequences for 
anti-viral immunity are yet to be systematically examined. Here, we show that 
rIIS in adult Caenorhabditis elegans increases the expression of key genes in 
two different anti-viral immunity pathways, whilst reducing viral load in old 
age, increasing survival and reducing rate-of-senescence under infection by 
naturally occurring positive-sense single-stranded RNA Orsay virus. We found 
that both drh-1 in the anti-viral RNA interference (RNAi) pathway and cde-1 in 
the terminal uridylation-based degradation of viral RNA pathway were upregulated 
in early adulthood under rIIS and increased anti-viral resistance was not 
associated with reproductive costs. Remarkably, rIIS increased anti-viral gene 
expression only in infected worms, potentially to curb the costs of 
constitutively upregulated immunity. RNA viruses are found across taxa from 
plants to mammals and we demonstrate a novel role for rIIS in regulating 
resistance to viral infection. We therefore highlight this evolutionarily 
conserved signalling pathway as a promising therapeutic target to improve 
anti-viral immunity.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11357-024-01147-7
PMCID: PMC11493891
PMID: 38589671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Wound Repair Regen. 2024 Nov-Dec;32(6):783-798. doi: 10.1111/wrr.13170. Epub 
2024 Apr 1.

What is slough? Defining the proteomic and microbial composition of slough and 
its implications for wound healing.

Townsend EC(1)(2)(3), Cheong JZA(1)(2), Radzietza M(4), Fritz B(5), Malone M(4), 
Bjarnsholt T(5)(6)(7), Ousey K(7)(8), Swanson T(7), Schultz G(7)(9), Gibson 
ALF(10), Kalan LR(1)(7)(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Wisconsin School of 
Medicine and Public Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(4)Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, Western Sydney University, Sydney, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(7)International Wound Infection Institute, London, UK.
(8)Institute of Skin Integrity and Infection Prevention, University of 
Huddersfield, West Yorkshire, UK.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida, USA.
(10)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public 
Health, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(11)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(12)M.G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(13)David Braley Centre for Antibiotic Discovery, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
Ontario, Canada.

Slough is a well-known feature of non-healing wounds. This pilot study aims to 
determine the proteomic and microbiologic components of slough as well as 
interrogate the associations between wound slough components and wound healing. 
Ten subjects with slow-to-heal wounds and visible slough were enrolled. 
Aetiologies included venous stasis ulcers, post-surgical site infections and 
pressure ulcers. Patient co-morbidities and wound healing outcome at 3-months 
post-sample collection was recorded. Debrided slough was analysed 
microscopically, through untargeted proteomics, and high-throughput bacterial 
16S-ribosomal gene sequencing. Microscopic imaging revealed wound slough to be 
amorphous in structure and highly variable. 16S-profiling found slough microbial 
communities to associate with wound aetiology and location on the body. Across 
all subjects, slough largely consisted of proteins involved in skin structure 
and formation, blood-clot formation and immune processes. To predict variables 
associated with wound healing, protein, microbial and clinical datasets were 
integrated into a supervised discriminant analysis. This analysis revealed that 
healing wounds were enriched for proteins involved in skin barrier development 
and negative regulation of immune responses. While wounds that deteriorated over 
time started off with a higher baseline Bates-Jensen Wound Assessment Score and 
were enriched for anaerobic bacterial taxa and chronic inflammatory proteins. To 
our knowledge, this is the first study to integrate clinical, microbiome, and 
proteomic data to systematically characterise wound slough and integrate it into 
a single assessment to predict wound healing outcome. Collectively, our findings 
underscore how slough components can help identify wounds at risk of continued 
impaired healing and serves as an underutilised biomarker.

© 2024 The Authors. Wound Repair and Regeneration published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of The Wound Healing Society.

DOI: 10.1111/wrr.13170
PMCID: PMC11442687
PMID: 38558438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Sci Total Environ. 2024 May 20;926:172102. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.172102.  Epub 2024 Mar 29.

Improved bacterial composition and co-occurrence patterns of rhizosphere 
increased nutrient uptake and grain yield through cultivars mixtures in maize.

Jia X(1), Shang H(2), Chen Y(2), Lin M(2), Wei Y(2), Li Y(1), Li R(1), Dong 
P(1), Chen Y(3), Zhang Y(4), Wang Q(5).

Author information:
(1)College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450046, China; 
The State Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science and Center for Crop 
Genome Engineering, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450046, China; 
Henan Province Agro-ecosystem Field Observation and Research Station, Xiping 
463900, China.
(2)College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450046, China.
(3)UWA Institute of Agriculture, School of Agriculture and Environment, The 
University of Western Australia, Perth, WA 6155, Australia.
(4)Agricultural Information Institute of Chinese Academy of Agricultural 
Science, Beijing 100000, China. Electronic address: zhangyongen@caas.cn.
(5)College of Agronomy, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450046, China; 
The State Key Laboratory of Wheat and Maize Crop Science and Center for Crop 
Genome Engineering, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450046, China; 
Henan Province Agro-ecosystem Field Observation and Research Station, Xiping 
463900, China. Electronic address: wangqun177@163.com.

Crop diversification contributes to agricultural productivity and resources 
efficient utilization. However, whether cultivar mixtures in maize affects soil 
bacterial community, nutrient uptake, plant growth and yield remains unknown. A 
two-year lysimetric experiment was conducted using two maize cultivars (LY16 and 
JS501) with different root system architectures planted in monoculture or in 
mixture under normal fertilization (NF), reduced fertilization (RF) or no 
addition of fertilizer (CK) and was assessed at the silking stages. Cultivar 
mixtures and monoculture of LY16 had higher shoot biomass, nutrient uptake and 
total root length at silking stage, and grain yield than monoculture of JS501 
under NF and RF conditions. Under NF and RF conditions, cultivar mixtures and 
monoculture of LY16 led to an increase in bacterial diversity, significant 
changes in community structure, and a high abundance of Bacteroidia and 
biomarkers of Chitinophagaceae and Saprospiraceae (Bacteroidia). Cultivar 
mixtures showed specific responses from modules of the rhizosphere bacterial 
community co-occurrence network, and the relative abundance of keystone taxa of 
cultivar mixtures was higher than that of monoculture of JS501. The keystone 
taxa had a broad and significant positive correlation with plant nutrient 
accumulation and grain yield. Cultivar mixtures showed similar assembly 
processes of Bacteroidia with monoculture of LY16, and the increased abundance 
of Chitinophagaceae may lead to a healthy rhizosphere bacterial community. 
Overall, our findings indicate that cultivar mixtures significantly affects the 
assembly and composition of the rhizosphere bacterial community, and thus 
benefits plant nutrient acquisition and plant growth. These findings could 
deepen our understanding of the facilitating effect of rhizosphere functional 
microbial community (e.g. plant nutrition uptake or immunity)of cultivar 
mixtures.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.172102
PMID: 38556018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2024 Mar 18;13(3):363. doi: 10.3390/antiox13030363.

A High-Fat-Diet-Induced Microbiota Imbalance Correlates with Oxidative Stress 
and the Inflammatory Response in the Gut of Freshwater Drum (Aplodinotus 
grunniens).

Xue M(1), Xu P(1)(2), Wen H(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Wang Q(1), He J(1), He C(1), 
Kong C(1), Li X(1), Li H(1)(2), Song C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Wuxi Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University, Wuxi 214081, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fisheries and Germplasm Resources Utilization, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Freshwater Fisheries Research Center, 
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Wuxi 214081, China.

Lipids are critical nutrients for aquatic animals, and excessive or insufficient 
lipid intake can lead to physiological disorders, which further affect fish 
growth and health. In aquatic animals, the gut microbiota has an important 
regulatory role in lipid metabolism. However, the effects of a high-fat diet on 
physical health and microbiota diversity in the gut of freshwater drum 
(Aplodinotus grunniens) are unclear. Therefore, in the present study, a control 
group (Con, 6%) and a high-fat diet group (HFD, 12%) were established for a 
16-week feeding experiment in freshwater drum to explore the physiological 
changes in the gut and the potential regulatory mechanisms of bacteria. The 
results indicated that a high-fat diet inhibited antioxidant and immune capacity 
while increasing inflammation, apoptosis and autophagy in gut cells. 
Transcriptome analysis revealed significant enrichment in immune-related, 
apoptosis-related and disease-related pathways. Through 16S rRNA analysis, a 
total of 31 genus-level differentially abundant bacterial taxa were identified. 
In addition, a high-fat diet reduced gut microbial diversity and disrupted the 
ecological balance of the gut microbiota (Ace, Chao, Shannon and Simpson 
indices). Integrated analysis of the gut microbiota combined with physiological 
indicators and the transcriptome revealed that gut microbial disorders were 
associated with intestinal antioxidants, immune and inflammatory responses, cell 
apoptosis and autophagy. Specifically, genus-level bacterial taxa in 
Proteobacteria (Plesiomonas, Arenimonas, Erythrobacter and Aquabacteriumb) could 
serve as potential targets controlling the response to high-fat-diet 
stimulation.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox13030363
PMCID: PMC10967924
PMID: 38539896

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Paediatr Respir Rev. 2024 Feb 16:S1526-0542(24)00017-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.prrv.2024.02.001. Online ahead of print.

The lower airway microbiome in paediatric health and chronic disease.

Campbell S(1), Gerasimidis K(1), Milling S(2), Dicker AJ(3), Hansen R(3), 
Langley RJ(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, University of Glasgow.
(2)School of Infection & Immunity, University of Glasgow.
(3)Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Dundee.
(4)Department of Paediatric Respiratory & Sleep Medicine, Royal Hospital for 
Children, Glasgow; Department of Maternal and Child Health, School of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Nursing, University of Glasgow. Electronic address: 
ross.langley@ggc.scot.nhs.uk.

The advent of next generation sequencing has rapidly challenged the paediatric 
respiratory physician's understanding of lung microbiology and the role of the 
lung microbiome in host health and disease. In particular, the role of 
"microbial key players" in paediatric respiratory disease is yet to be fully 
explained. Accurate profiling of the lung microbiome in children is challenging 
since the ability to obtain lower airway samples coupled with processing 
"low-biomass specimens" are both technically difficult. Many studies provide 
conflicting results. Early microbiota-host relationships may be predictive of 
the development of chronic respiratory disease but attempts to correlate lower 
airway microbiota in premature infants and risk of developing bronchopulmonary 
dysplasia (BPD) have produced mixed results. There are differences in lung 
microbiota in asthma and cystic fibrosis (CF). The increased abundance of oral 
taxa in the lungs may (or may not) promote disease processes in asthma and CF. 
In CF, correlation between microbiota diversity and respiratory decline is 
commonly observed. When one considers other pathogens beyond the bacterial 
kingdom, the contribution and interplay of fungi and viruses within the lung 
microbiome further increase complexity. Similarly, the interaction between 
microbial communities in different body sites, such as the gut-lung axis, and 
the influence of environmental factors, including diet, make the co-existence of 
host and microbes ever more complicated. Future, multi-omics approaches may help 
uncover novel microbiome-based biomarkers and therapeutic targets in respiratory 
disease and explain how we can live in harmony with our microbial companions.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prrv.2024.02.001
PMID: 38538377

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Mucosal Immunol. 2024 Jun;17(3):402-415. doi: 10.1016/j.mucimm.2024.03.007.
Epub  2024 Mar 21.

Interaction of microbiota, mucosal malignancies, and immunotherapy-Mechanistic 
insights.

Mager LF(1), Krause T(2), McCoy KD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic 
Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada; 
Department of Internal Medicine I, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tübingen, 
Germany; M3 Research Center for Malignom, Metabolome and Microbiome, Faculty of 
Medicine University Tübingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine I, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Tübingen, Germany; M3 Research Center for Malignom, Metabolome and Microbiome, 
Faculty of Medicine University Tübingen, Germany.
(3)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Snyder Institute for Chronic 
Diseases, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada. 
Electronic address: kathy.mccoy@ucalgary.ca.

The microbiome has emerged as a crucial modulator of host-immune interactions 
and clearly impacts tumor development and therapy efficacy. The microbiome is a 
double-edged sword in cancer development and therapy as both pro-tumorigenic and 
anti-tumorigenic bacterial taxa have been identified. The staggering number of 
association-based studies in various tumor types has led to an enormous amount 
of data that makes it difficult to identify bacteria that promote tumor 
development or modulate therapy efficacy from bystander bacteria. Here we aim to 
comprehensively summarize the current knowledge of microbiome-host immunity 
interactions and cancer therapy in various mucosal tissues to find commonalities 
and thus identify potential functionally relevant bacterial taxa. Moreover, we 
also review recent studies identifying specific bacteria and mechanisms through 
which the microbiome modulates cancer development and therapy efficacy.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mucimm.2024.03.007
PMID: 38521413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. J Nutr. 2024 May;154(5):1582-1587. doi: 10.1016/j.tjnut.2024.03.014. Epub 2024
 Mar 21.

The Effect of Iron Supplements on the Gut Microbiome of Females of Reproductive 
Age: A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Elms L(1), Hand B(2), Skubisz M(3), Best KP(3), Grzeskowiak LE(4), Rogers GB(1), 
Green TJ(5), Taylor SL(6).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome and Host Health Programme, South Australia Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Infection and 
Immunity, College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Bedford 
Park, South Australia, Australia.
(2)College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders University, Bedford Park, 
South Australia, Australia.
(3)SAHMRI Women and Kids Theme, South Australia Health and Medical Research 
Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Discipline of Pediatrics, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Adelaide Medical School, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(4)SAHMRI Women and Kids Theme, South Australia Health and Medical Research 
Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; College of Medicine and Public 
Health, Flinders University, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(5)College of Nursing and Health Sciences, Flinders University, Bedford Park, 
South Australia, Australia; SAHMRI Women and Kids Theme, South Australia Health 
and Medical Research Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(6)Microbiome and Host Health Programme, South Australia Health and Medical 
Research Institute, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; Infection and 
Immunity, College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University, Bedford 
Park, South Australia, Australia. Electronic address: steven.taylor@sahmri.com.

BACKGROUND: Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency worldwide, 
particularly for young children and females of reproductive age. Although oral 
iron supplements are routinely recommended and generally considered safe, iron 
supplementation has been shown to alter the fecal microbiota in low-income 
countries. Little is known about the effect of iron supplementation on the fecal 
microbiota in high-income settings.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of oral iron supplementation compared with 
placebo on the gut microbiome in nonpregnant females of reproductive age in a 
high-income country.
METHODS: A 21-d prospective parallel design double-blind, randomized control 
trial conducted in South Australia, Australia. Females (18-45 y) were randomly 
assigned to either iron (65.7 mg ferrous fumarate) or placebo. Fecal samples 
were collected prior to commencing supplements and after 21 d of 
supplementation. The primary outcome was microbiota β-diversity (paired-sample 
weighted unique fraction metric dissimilarity) between treatment and placebo 
groups after 21 d of supplementation. Exploratory outcomes included changes in 
the relative abundance of bacterial taxa.
RESULTS: Of 82 females randomly assigned, 80 completed the trial. There was no 
significant difference between the groups for weighted unique fraction metric 
dissimilarity (mean difference: 0.003; 95% confidence interval: -0.007, 0.014; P 
= 0.52) or relative abundance of common bacterial taxa or Escherichia-Shigella 
(q > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Iron supplementation did not affect the microbiome of nonpregnant 
females of reproductive age in Australia. This trial was registered at 
clinicaltrials.gov as NCT05033483.

Copyright © 2024 American Society for Nutrition. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tjnut.2024.03.014
PMID: 38521191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Cell Host Microbe. 2024 Apr 10;32(4):527-542.e9. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2024.03.001. Epub 2024 Mar 20.

Opposing diet, microbiome, and metabolite mechanisms regulate inflammatory bowel 
disease in a genetically susceptible host.

Pereira GV(1), Boudaud M(2), Wolter M(3), Alexander C(1), De Sciscio A(2), Grant 
ET(3), Trindade BC(4), Pudlo NA(1), Singh S(1), Campbell A(1), Shan M(5), Zhang 
L(5), Yang Q(1), Willieme S(2), Kim K(4), Denike-Duval T(6), Fuentes J(1), 
Bleich A(7), Schmidt TM(8), Kennedy L(6), Lyssiotis CA(5), Chen GY(4), Eaton 
KA(1), Desai MS(9), Martens EC(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 4354 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(3)Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 4354 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; Faculty of Science, Technology and Medicine, 
University of Luxembourg, 4365 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.
(7)Institute for Laboratory Animal Science, Hanover Medical School, Hanover, 
Germany.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 4354 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; Odense Research Center for Anaphylaxis, Department 
of Dermatology and Allergy Center, Odense University Hospital, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. Electronic address: mahesh.desai@lih.lu.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic address: emartens@umich.edu.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are chronic conditions characterized by 
periods of spontaneous intestinal inflammation and are increasing in 
industrialized populations. Combined with host genetics, diet and gut bacteria 
are thought to contribute prominently to IBDs, but mechanisms are still 
emerging. In mice lacking the IBD-associated cytokine, interleukin-10, we show 
that a fiber-deprived gut microbiota promotes the deterioration of colonic 
mucus, leading to lethal colitis. Inflammation starts with the expansion of 
natural killer cells and altered immunoglobulin-A coating of some bacteria. 
Lethal colitis is then driven by Th1 immune responses to increased activities of 
mucin-degrading bacteria that cause inflammation first in regions with thinner 
mucus. A fiber-free exclusive enteral nutrition diet also induces mucus erosion 
but inhibits inflammation by simultaneously increasing an anti-inflammatory 
bacterial metabolite, isobutyrate. Our findings underscore the importance of 
focusing on microbial functions-not taxa-contributing to IBDs and that some 
diet-mediated functions can oppose those that promote disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2024.03.001
PMCID: PMC11064055
PMID: 38513656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.C.M. works as a 
consultant and an advisory board member at January, Inc., United States. M.S.D. 
works as a consultant and an advisory board member at Theralution GmbH, Germany.

1. PLoS One. 2024 Mar 21;19(3):e0298443. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0298443. 
eCollection 2024.

The causal relationship between gut microbiota and immune skin diseases: A 
bidirectional Mendelian randomization.

Feng F(1), Li R(2), Tian R(2), Wu X(2), Zhang N(2), Nie Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin, China.
(2)Tianjin University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tianjin, China.
(3)Tianjin Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated Hospital, Tianjin, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests that alterations in gut microbiota are 
associated with a variety of skin diseases. However, whether this association 
reflects a causal relationship remains unknown. We aimed to reveal the causal 
relationship between gut microbiota and skin diseases, including psoriasis, 
atopic dermatitis, acne, and lichen planus.
METHODS: We obtained full genetic association summary data for gut microbiota, 
psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, acne, and lichen planus from public databases and 
used three methods, mainly inverse variance weighting, to analyze the causal 
relationships between gut microbiota and these skin diseases using bidirectional 
Mendelian randomization, as well as sensitivity and stability analysis of the 
results using multiple methods.
RESULTS: The results showed that there were five associated genera in the 
psoriasis group, seven associated genera were obtained in the atopic dermatitis 
group, a total of ten associated genera in the acne group, and four associated 
genera in the lichen planus group. The results corrected for false discovery 
rate showed that Eubacteriumfissicatenagroup (P = 2.20E-04, OR = 1.24, 
95%CI:1.11-1.40) and psoriasis still showed a causal relationship. In contrast, 
in the reverse Mendelian randomization results, there was no evidence of an 
association between these skin diseases and gut microbiota.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated a causal relationship between gut microbiota and 
immune skin diseases and provide a new therapeutic perspective for the study of 
immune diseases: targeted modulation of dysregulation of specific bacterial taxa 
to prevent and treat psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, acne, and lichen planus.

Copyright: © 2024 Feng et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0298443
PMCID: PMC10956797
PMID: 38512926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. Trends Microbiol. 2024 Oct;32(10):970-983. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2024.02.013.
Epub  2024 Mar 19.

Small intestinal microbiota: from taxonomic composition to metabolism.

Yersin S(1), Vonaesch P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Fundamental Microbiology, Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: pascale.vonaesch@unil.ch.

The small intestinal microbiota (SIM) is essential for gastrointestinal health, 
influencing digestion, immune modulation, and nutrient metabolism. Unlike the 
colonic microbiota, the SIM has been poorly characterized due to sampling 
challenges and ethical considerations. Current evidence suggests that the SIM 
consists of five core genera and additional segment-specific taxa. These 
bacteria closely interact with the human host, regulating nutrient absorption 
and metabolism. Recent work suggests the presence of two forms of small 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth, one dominated by oral bacteria (SIOBO) and a 
second dominated by coliform bacteria. Less invasive sampling techniques, omics 
approaches, and mechanistic studies will allow a more comprehensive 
understanding of the SIM, paving the way for interventions engineering the SIM 
towards better health.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tim.2024.02.013
PMID: 38503579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests No interests are 
declared.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Mar 18;24(1):91. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03251-2.

Pretreatment with an antibiotics cocktail enhances the protective effect of 
probiotics by regulating SCFA metabolism and Th1/Th2/Th17 cell immune responses.

Xu J(#)(1)(2), Xu H(#)(2), Guo X(#)(1)(2), Zhao H(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Li 
J(1)(2), He J(2), Huang H(2), Huang C(2), Zhao C(2), Li Y(2), Zhou Y(3), Peng 
Y(4), Nie Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, the Second Affiliated 
Hospital, School of Medicine, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, 
Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou First People's 
Hospital, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou First People's 
Hospital, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
eyyoulianzhou@scut.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou First People's 
Hospital, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
pennysmail@126.com.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou First People's 
Hospital, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
eynieyuqiang@scut.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Probiotics are a potentially effective therapy for inflammatory 
bowel disease (IBD); IBD is linked to impaired gut microbiota and intestinal 
immunity. However, the utilization of an antibiotic cocktail (Abx) prior to the 
probiotic intervention remains controversial. This study aims to identify the 
effect of Abx pretreatment from dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis and 
to evaluate whether Abx pretreatment has an enhanced effect on the protection of 
Clostridium butyricum Miyairi588 (CBM) from colitis.
RESULTS: The inflammation, dysbiosis, and dysfunction of gut microbiota as well 
as T cell response were both enhanced by Abx pretreatment. Additionally, CBM 
significantly alleviated the DSS-induced colitis and impaired gut epithelial 
barrier, and Abx pretreatment could enhance these protective effects. 
Furthermore, CBM increased the benefit bacteria abundance and short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs) level with Abx pretreatment. CBM intervention after Abx 
pretreatment regulated the imbalance of cytokines and transcription factors, 
which corresponded to lower infiltration of Th1 and Th17 cells, and increased 
Th2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Abx pretreatment reinforced the function of CBM in ameliorating 
inflammation and barrier damage by increasing beneficial taxa, eliminating 
pathogens, and inducing a protective Th2 cell response. This study reveals a 
link between Abx pretreatment, microbiota, and immune response changes in 
colitis, which provides a reference for the further application of Abx 
pretreatment before microbiota-based intervention.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03251-2
PMCID: PMC10946100
PMID: 38500062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Cell Host Microbe. 2024 Apr 10;32(4):506-526.e9. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2024.02.012. Epub 2024 Mar 12.

Longitudinal profiling of the microbiome at four body sites reveals core 
stability and individualized dynamics during health and disease.

Zhou X(1), Shen X(2), Johnson JS(3), Spakowicz DJ(4), Agnello M(5), Zhou W(2), 
Avina M(6), Honkala A(7), Chleilat F(6), Chen SJ(8), Cha K(8), Leopold S(9), Zhu 
C(6), Chen L(10), Lyu L(11), Hornburg D(6), Wu S(6), Zhang X(6), Jiang C(12), 
Jiang L(13), Jiang L(6), Jian R(6), Brooks AW(6), Wang M(6), Contrepois K(6), 
Gao P(6), Rose SMS(6), Tran TDB(14), Nguyen H(14), Celli A(6), Hong BY(15), 
Bautista EJ(16), Dorsett Y(17), Kavathas PB(18), Zhou Y(17), Sodergren E(14), 
Weinstock GM(14), Snyder MP(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Stanford Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Stanford Diabetes Research Center, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; The 
Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Stanford Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.
(3)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Oxford Centre for Microbiome Studies, Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, 
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Headington, Oxford OX3 7FY, UK.
(4)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Division of Medical Oncology, Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, James 
Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(5)Medical Affairs, uBiome, San Francisco, CA 94103, USA.
(6)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Stanford Healthcare Innovation Labs, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.
(8)Stanford Healthcare Innovation Labs, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(9)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 
06520, USA.
(10)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 
200240, PRC.
(11)Shanghai Institute of Immunology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 
200240, PRC.
(12)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310058, PRC.
(13)Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, 
PRC.
(14)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA.
(15)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Woody L Hunt School of Dental Medicine, Texas Tech University Health Science 
Center, El Paso, TX 79905, USA.
(16)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Corporación Colombiana de Investigación Agropecuaria (Agrosavia), 
Headquarters-Mosquera, Cundinamarca 250047, Colombia.
(17)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT 06032, USA; 
Department of Medicine, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 
06032, USA.
(18)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT 06520, USA; Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(19)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Stanford Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA; Stanford Diabetes Research Center, Stanford, CA 94305, USA; Stanford 
Healthcare Innovation Labs, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. Electronic address: mpsnyder@stanford.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Feb 01:2024.02.01.577565. doi: 10.1101/2024.02.01.577565.

To understand the dynamic interplay between the human microbiome and host during 
health and disease, we analyzed the microbial composition, temporal dynamics, 
and associations with host multi-omics, immune, and clinical markers of 
microbiomes from four body sites in 86 participants over 6 years. We found that 
microbiome stability and individuality are body-site specific and heavily 
influenced by the host. The stool and oral microbiome are more stable than the 
skin and nasal microbiomes, possibly due to their interaction with the host and 
environment. We identify individual-specific and commonly shared bacterial taxa, 
with individualized taxa showing greater stability. Interestingly, microbiome 
dynamics correlate across body sites, suggesting systemic dynamics influenced by 
host-microbial-environment interactions. Notably, insulin-resistant individuals 
show altered microbial stability and associations among microbiome, molecular 
markers, and clinical features, suggesting their disrupted interaction in 
metabolic disease. Our study offers comprehensive views of multi-site microbial 
dynamics and their relationship with host health and disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2024.02.012
PMCID: PMC11022754
PMID: 38479397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests M.P.S. is a co-founder 
and the scientific advisory board member of Personalis, Qbio, January, 
SensOmics, Filtricine, Akna, Protos, Mirvie, NiMo, Onza, Oralome, Marble 
Therapeutics, and Iollo. He is also on the scientific advisory board of Danaher, 
Genapsys, and Jupiter. A.H. is a founder and shareholder of Arxeon. Y.Z. and 
G.M.W. are co-founders of General Biomics.

1. Eur J Med Res. 2024 Mar 12;29(1):161. doi: 10.1186/s40001-024-01741-7.

Univariable and multivariable Mendelian randomization study identified the key 
role of gut microbiota in immunotherapeutic toxicity.

Liu B(1)(2), Liu Z(3), Jiang T(1)(2), Gu X(4), Yin X(1)(2), Cai Z(1)(2), Zou 
X(1)(2), Dai L(5), Zhang B(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Gastric Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
610041, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Biotherapy and National Clinical Research Center for 
Geriatrics, Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
610041, Sichuan, People's Republic of China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Cancer Center, West China Hospital, 
Sichuan University and Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, Chengdu, 
610041, Sichuan, People's Republic of China. daileisklb2012@163.com.
(6)Department of General Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan, People's Republic of China. zhangbo_scu@scu.edu.cn.
(7)Gastric Cancer Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 
610041, Sichuan, People's Republic of China. zhangbo_scu@scu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: In cancer patients receiving immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), 
there is emerging evidence suggesting a correlation between gut microbiota and 
immune-related adverse events (irAEs). However, the exact roles of gut 
microbiota and the causal associations are yet to be clarified.
METHODS: To investigate this, we first conducted a univariable bi-directional 
two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. Instrumental variables (IVs) 
for gut microbiota were retrieved from the MiBioGen consortium (18,340 
participants). GWAS summary data for irAEs were gathered from an ICIs-treated 
cohort with 1,751 cancer patients. Various MR analysis methods, including 
inverse variance weighted (IVW), MR PRESSO, maximum likelihood (ML), weighted 
median, weighted mode, and cML-MA-BIC, were used. Furthermore, multivariable MR 
(MVMR) analysis was performed to account for possible influencing instrumental 
variables.
RESULTS: Our analysis identified fourteen gut bacterial taxa that were causally 
associated with irAEs. Notably, Lachnospiraceae was strongly associated with an 
increased risk of both high-grade and all-grade irAEs, even after accounting for 
the effect of BMI in the MVMR analysis. Akkermansia, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and 
Anaerostipes were found to exert protective roles in high-grade irAEs. However, 
Ruminiclostridium6, Coprococcus3, Collinsella, and Eubacterium (fissicatena 
group) were associated with a higher risk of developing high-grade irAEs. 
RuminococcaceaeUCG004, and DefluviitaleaceaeUCG011 were protective against 
all-grade irAEs, whereas Porphyromonadaceae, Roseburia, Eubacterium (brachy 
group), and Peptococcus were associated with an increased risk of all-grade 
irAEs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis highlights a strong causal association between 
Lachnospiraceae and irAEs, along with some other gut microbial taxa. These 
findings provide potential modifiable targets for managing irAEs and warrant 
further investigation.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40001-024-01741-7
PMCID: PMC10929167
PMID: 38475836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microbes Infect. 2024 May-Jun;26(4):105317. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105317.
 Epub 2024 Mar 5.

Paired qualitative and quantitative analysis of bacterial microcolonies in the 
tonsils of patients with tonsillar hyperplasia.

Teh J(1), Biswas K(2), Waldvogel-Thurlow S(1), Broderick D(1), Clark ST(3), 
Johnston J(4), Wagner Mackenzie B(1), Douglas R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, The University of Auckland, 
Auckland, 1023, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, The University of Auckland, 
Auckland, 1023, New Zealand. Electronic address: k.biswas@auckland.ac.nz.
(3)Te Whatu Ora - Te Toka Tumai Auckland, Health New Zealand, Auckland, 1142, 
New Zealand.
(4)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine, The University of Auckland, 
Auckland, 1023, New Zealand; Te Whatu Ora - Te Toka Tumai Auckland, Health New 
Zealand, Auckland, 1142, New Zealand.

The discovery of bacterial microcolonies in tonsillar tissue of patients with 
tonsillar hyperplasia has raised the question of their role in provoking the 
local immune response. Tonsils collected from patients undergoing tonsillectomy 
were stained for three clinically relevant bacterial taxa and lymphocytes. The 
bacterial composition and abundance of microcolonies was investigated using a 
combination of laser-microdissection, amplicon sequencing and Droplet Digital 
polymerase chain reaction. Microcolonies were detected in most samples (32/35) 
with a high prevalence of Haemophilus influenzae (78% of samples). B and T cell 
lymphocytes were significantly higher in the epithelium adjacent to 
microcolonies compared to epithelium distal to microcolonies. Furthermore, 
significant positive and negative correlations were identified between bacterial 
taxa and lymphocytes. Genus Streptococcus, which includes Group A Streptococcus 
(traditionally described as the main pathogen of tonsillar hyperplasia), was 
found in low abundance in this study. These results suggest other potential 
pathogens may be involved in stimulating the local immune response leading to 
tonsillar hyperplasia.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105317
PMID: 38452852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
declare no competing interests.