1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Feb 19;12:634511. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.634511. 
eCollection 2021.

Applications of Machine Learning in Human Microbiome Studies: A Review on 
Feature Selection, Biomarker Identification, Disease Prediction and Treatment.

Marcos-Zambrano LJ(1), Karaduzovic-Hadziabdic K(2), Loncar Turukalo T(3), 
Przymus P(4), Trajkovik V(5), Aasmets O(6)(7), Berland M(8), Gruca A(9), Hasic 
J(10), Hron K(11), Klammsteiner T(12), Kolev M(13), Lahti L(14), Lopes 
MB(15)(16), Moreno V(17)(18)(19)(20), Naskinova I(13), Org E(6), Paciência 
I(21), Papoutsoglou G(22), Shigdel R(23), Stres B(24), Vilne B(25), Yousef 
M(26)(27), Zdravevski E(5), Tsamardinos I(22), Carrillo de Santa Pau E(1), 
Claesson MJ(28), Moreno-Indias I(29)(30), Truu J(31).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Group, Precision Nutrition and Cancer Research Program, 
IMDEA Food Institute, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, International University of 
Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(3)Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.
(4)Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Nicolaus Copernicus University, 
Toruń, Poland.
(5)Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, Ss. Cyril and Methodius 
University, Skopje, North Macedonia.
(6)Institute of Genomics, Estonian Genome Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.
(7)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(8)Université Paris-Saclay, INRAE, MGP, Jouy-en-Josas, France.
(9)Department of Computer Networks and Systems, Silesian University of 
Technology, Gliwice, Poland.
(10)University Sarajevo School of Science and Technology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
(11)Department of Mathematical Analysis and Applications of Mathematics, Palacký 
University, Olomouc, Czechia.
(12)Department of Microbiology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(13)South West University "Neofit Rilski", Blagoevgrad, Bulgaria.
(14)Department of Computing, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(15)NOVA Laboratory for Computer Science and Informatics (NOVA LINCS), FCT, UNL, 
Caparica, Portugal.
(16)Centro de Matemática e Aplicações (CMA), FCT, UNL, Caparica, Portugal.
(17)Oncology Data Analytics Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO) 
Barcelona, Spain.
(18)Colorectal Cancer Group, Institut de Recerca Biomedica de Bellvitge 
(IDIBELL), Barcelona, Spain.
(19)Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology and Public Health 
(CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Department of Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(21)EPIUnit - Instituto de Saúde Pública da Universidade do Porto, Porto, 
Portugal.
(22)Department of Computer Science, University of Crete, Heraklion, Greece.
(23)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(24)Group for Microbiology and Microbial Biotechnology, Department of Animal 
Science, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(25)Bioinformatics Research Unit, Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia.
(26)Department of Information Systems, Zefat Academic College, Zefat, Israel.
(27)Galilee Digital Health Research Center (GDH), Zefat Academic College, Zefat, 
Israel.
(28)School of Microbiology & APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, 
Cork, Ireland.
(29)Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Instituto de 
Investigación Biomédica de Málaga (IBIMA), Hospital Clínico Universitario Virgen 
de la Victoria, Universidad de Málaga, Málaga, Spain.
(30)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y 
la Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(31)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, 
Estonia.

The number of microbiome-related studies has notably increased the availability 
of data on human microbiome composition and function. These studies provide the 
essential material to deeply explore host-microbiome associations and their 
relation to the development and progression of various complex diseases. 
Improved data-analytical tools are needed to exploit all information from these 
biological datasets, taking into account the peculiarities of microbiome data, 
i.e., compositional, heterogeneous and sparse nature of these datasets. The 
possibility of predicting host-phenotypes based on taxonomy-informed feature 
selection to establish an association between microbiome and predict disease 
states is beneficial for personalized medicine. In this regard, machine learning 
(ML) provides new insights into the development of models that can be used to 
predict outputs, such as classification and prediction in microbiology, infer 
host phenotypes to predict diseases and use microbial communities to stratify 
patients by their characterization of state-specific microbial signatures. Here 
we review the state-of-the-art ML methods and respective software applied in 
human microbiome studies, performed as part of the COST Action ML4Microbiome 
activities. This scoping review focuses on the application of ML in microbiome 
studies related to association and clinical use for diagnostics, prognostics, 
and therapeutics. Although the data presented here is more related to the 
bacterial community, many algorithms could be applied in general, regardless of 
the feature type. This literature and software review covering this broad topic 
is aligned with the scoping review methodology. The manual identification of 
data sources has been complemented with: (1) automated publication search 
through digital libraries of the three major publishers using natural language 
processing (NLP) Toolkit, and (2) an automated identification of relevant 
software repositories on GitHub and ranking of the related research papers 
relying on learning to rank approach.

Copyright © 2021 Marcos-Zambrano, Karaduzovic-Hadziabdic, Loncar Turukalo, 
Przymus, Trajkovik, Aasmets, Berland, Gruca, Hasic, Hron, Klammsteiner, Kolev, 
Lahti, Lopes, Moreno, Naskinova, Org, Paciência, Papoutsoglou, Shigdel, Stres, 
Vilne, Yousef, Zdravevski, Tsamardinos, Carrillo de Santa Pau, Claesson, 
Moreno-Indias and Truu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.634511
PMCID: PMC7962872
PMID: 33737920

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.