Tongxieyaofang (TXYF) was a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) formula for the treatment of diarrhea with liver stagnation and spleen deficiency syndrome, but the potential targets and mechanisms have not been fully clarified. This study aims to explore the potential mechanisms of TXYF in alleviating diarrhea using network pharmacology and full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing. METHODS: Network pharmacology was applied to identify bioactive compounds and potential targets involved in the role of TXYF in alleviating diarrhea. Meanwhile, a model of diarrhea with liver stagnation and spleen deficiency syndrome was constructed by intragastric administration of Folium senna extract combined with restraint and tail pinch stress. The effect of TXYF on intestinal mucosal microbiota of diarrhea mice was analyzed by full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: Network pharmacology analysis showed that kaempferol, wogonin, naringenin, and nobiletin were compounds associated with the efficacy of TXYF. TXYF may alleviate diarrhea via multiple BPs and pathways, including TNF signaling pathway, IL-17 signaling pathway, and Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, which are involved in TCM-gut microbiota-host interactions. Then, we found that TXYF administration reshaped the diversity and composition of the intestinal mucosal microbial community of diarrhea mice. Lactobacillus, primarily Lactobacillus johnsonii, was enriched by the administration of TXYF. After TXYF administration, the abundance of Lactobacillus, particularly Lactobacillus johnsonii, was enriched. CONCLUSION: Oral administration of TXYF may alleviate diarrhea through remodeling intestinal mucosal microbiota. Promoting the colonization of beneficial commensal bacteria in the intestinal mucosa through gut microbiota-host interactions may be a potential mechanism of TXYF in the treatment of diarrhea.

The results of strain identification and antimicrobial susceptibility testing of pathogens in patients with esophageal cancer from January 2013 to December 2022 at our hospital were retrospectively analyzed. SPSS Statistics 26.0 (IBM) and R software 4.3.1 were used for data analysis. RESULTS: In total, 2322 non-repetitive pathogens were isolated from 14,037 samples. Of all strains, 1713 (73.77%) were Gram-negative bacteria, 483 (20.80%) were Gram-positive bacteria, and 126 (5.43%) were fungi. The top 10 pathogens were Pseudomonas aeruginosa (19.81%), Stenotrophomonas maltophilia (12.88%), A. baumannii (9.91%), Klebsiella pneumoniae (9.82%), Staphylococcus aureus (7.54%), Candida albicans (3.92%), Staphylococcus epidermidis (3.19%), Escherichia coli (3.14%), Enterococcus faecalis (2.97%), and Serratia marcescens (2.15%). The isolation rate of S. maltophilia showed an upward trend (p < 0.05). The resistance rates of P. aeruginosa, S. maltophilia, A. baumannii, and Enterobacteriaceae bacteria to some common antibiotics showed a tendency to change (p < 0.05), and 2019 became a turning point to some extent. All common Gram-positive pathogens were sensitive to vancomycin, except for three Enterococcus spp. isolates that showed intrinsic resistance. The prevalence of MRSA was 65.14% (114/175) in this study. In addition, the resistance rates of MRSA and MSSA to moxifloxacin, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, erythromycin, clindamycin, and penicillin were significantly different (p < 0.001). CONCLUSION: Pathogens are diverse in patients with esophageal cancer, with the most common being P. aeruginosa, followed by S. maltophilia. The pathogens exhibited different patterns of resistance. Antibiotics should be used rationally according to pathogen resistance patterns.

100 subgingival plaque samples were collected from 50 subjects (16 MP, 17 SP and 17 PH), forming six groups: PHS (PH, shallow), MPS (MP, shallow), MPM (MP, moderate), SPS (SP, shallow), SPM (SP, moderate), and SPD (SP, deep). Samples were analyzed using high-throughput sequencing. RESULT: The subgingival microbiome showed significant differences associated with both PD and periodontitis stage (p < 0.05). With increasing PD, alpha diversity initially increased and then decreased. Pathogenic genera like Fusobacterium, Filifactor, and Porphyromonas increased, while health-associated genera like Streptococcus and Haemophilus decreased. At shallow sites, the PHS, MPS, and SPS groups showed similar community structure. At moderate and deep sites, the SPM and SPD groups exhibited significant differences in community structure compared to the MPM group, with the SPM and SPD groups showing decreased abundances of Actinomyces and increased abundances of Treponema. The microbial co-networks in the SPD and SPM groups exhibited greater complexity and connectivity and were more resilient to random microbial or node removal. CONCLUSIONS: The subgingival microbiome shows strong associations with PD and periodontitis stage. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Once periodontitis progresses to stage III/IV, reconstructing a healthy subgingival microbiome may be challenging, emphasizing the importance of early prevention.

A rat model of FD was established through the tail-clamping stimulation method. The rat model of FD was assessed by the state of rats, their weight, sucrose preference rate, and intestinal propulsion rate. The DNA was extracted from stool samples after treatment with SMT. Amplified polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products of the 16S rDNA were sequenced using NovaseQ6000 after construction of libraries. Composition of gut microbial community in the stool samples was determined and analyzed by cluster analysis, bioinformatic analysis, and analysis of α-diversity and β-diversity. RESULTS: The rat model of FD was successfully established using the tail-clamping stimulation method. The statistical results of cluster analysis of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) showed that the relative abundance of OTUs in the FD group was the lowest, while it was the highest in the normal (N) group. The composition of microbiome in the four groups was similar at phyla level. Compared with the FD group, the abundance of Firmicutes was downregulated, and the abundance of Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes was upregulated in the Simo Tang (SMT) and high-dose Simo Tang (SMT.G) groups. The ratio of Bacteroidetes/ Firmicutes was also elevated. According to the analysis of α-diversity and β-diversity, the abundance of flora in FD rats was significantly reduced. The treatment using SMT appeared beneficial to improve the diversity of flora. SMT could improve the intestinal flora in FD rats. The results showed that FD rats had intestinal flora imbalance, and species diversity increased. The results suggested that SMT could regulate the disorders of intestinal flora caused by FD. CONCLUDIONS: SMT could restore gut homeostasis and maintain gut flora diversity by modulating the gut microbiota and its associated metabolites in rats, thereby treating gastrointestinal diseases.

MPGPD is a rare NTM infection. The imaging manifestations of MPGPD are diverse and may even show rapid development. mNGS of tissue biopsy can enable prompt diagnosis of MPG infection and is a good alternative to routine NTM microbial testing. The ATS/IDSA protocol for MG infection is an effective treatment for MPG infection.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) species evolve slowly, so isolates from individuals linked in transmission often have identical or nearly identical genomes, making it difficult to reconstruct transmission chains. Finding additional sources of shared MTBC variation could help overcome this problem. Previous studies have reported MTBC diversity within infected individuals; however, whether within-host variation improves transmission inferences remains unclear. Here, we aimed to quantify within-host MTBC variation and assess whether such information improves transmission inferences. METHODS: We conducted a retrospective genomic epidemiology study in which we reanalysed publicly available sequence data from household transmission studies published in PubMed from database inception until Jan 31, 2024, for which both genomic and epidemiological contact data were available, using household membership as a proxy for transmission linkage. We quantified minority variants (ie, positions with two or more alleles each supported by at least five-fold coverage and with a minor allele frequency of 1% or more) outside of PE and PPE genes, within individual samples and shared across samples. We used receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves to compare the performance of a general linear model for household membership that included shared minority variants and one that included only fixed genetic differences. FINDINGS: We identified three MTBC household transmission studies with publicly available whole-genome sequencing data and epidemiological linkages: a household transmission study in Vitória, Brazil (Colangeli et al), a retrospective population-based study of paediatric tuberculosis in British Columbia, Canada (Guthrie et al), and a retrospective population-based study in Oxfordshire, England (Walker et al). We found moderate levels of minority variation present in MTBC sequence data from cultured isolates that varied significantly across studies: mean 168·6 minority variants (95% CI 151·4-185·9) for the Colangeli et al dataset, 5·8 (1·5-10·2) for Guthrie et al (p<0·0001, Wilcoxon rank sum test, vs Colangeli et al), and 7·1 (2·4-11·9) for Walker et al (p<0·0001, Wilcoxon rank sum test, vs Colangeli et al). Isolates from household pairs shared more minority variants than did randomly selected pairs of isolates: mean 97·7 shared minority variants (79·1-116·3) versus 9·8 (8·6-11·0) in Colangeli et al, 0·8 (0·1-1·5) versus 0·2 (0·1-0·2) in Guthrie et al, and 0·7 (0·1-1·3) versus 0·2 (0·2-0·2) in Walker et al (all p<0·0001, Wilcoxon rank sum test). Shared within-host variation was significantly associated with household membership (odds ratio 1·51 [95% CI 1·30-1·71], p<0·0001), for one standard deviation increase in shared minority variants. Models that included shared within-host variation versus models without within-host variation improved the accuracy of predicting household membership in all three studies: area under the ROC curve 0·95 versus 0·92 for the Colangeli et al study, 0·99 versus 0·95 for the Guthrie et al study, and 0·93 versus 0·91 for the Walker et al study. INTERPRETATION: Within-host MTBC variation persists through culture of sputum and could enhance the resolution of transmission inferences. The substantial differences in minority variation recovered across studies highlight the need to optimise approaches to recover and incorporate within-host variation into automated phylogenetic and transmission inference. FUNDING: National Institutes of Health.

Allergic rhinitis (AR) subjects might have their microenvironment changed due to pathogenesis and living environment. Whether the nasal microbe in AR children differs from healthy subjects and how it interplays with dermal, oral and indoor dust microbe needs to be elucidated. METHODS: In this case-control study, we analyzed and compared the bacterial characterization and associations in nasal, dermal, oral swab samples and dust samples in 62 children with physician-diagnosed AR(cases) and 51 age- and gender-matched healthy ones with no history of allergic diseases(controls). Full-length 16S rRNA sequencing(swabs) and shotgun metagenomics(dust) were applied. Bacterial diversity, composition, abundance difference characteristics and fast expectation-maximization for microbial source tracking(FEAST) analysis were performed and compared between cases and controls. RESULTS: The α-diversity of dust microorganisms in AR was lower than that in control group (P = 0.034), and the β-diversity indices of microorganisms in nasal cavity (P = 0.020), skin (P = 0.001) and dust (P = 0.004) were significantly different from those in control group. At species levels, a total of 10, 15, 12, and 15 bacterial species were differentially enriched in either cases or controls in nasal, dermal, oral, and dust samples, respectively(Linear Discriminant Analysis(LDA) score > 2, P < 0.05). Staphylococcus epidermidis was the single species simultaneously more abundant in nasal, dermal and dust samples in AR children. By FEAST analysis, 8.85% and 10.11% of S. epidermidis in AR dermal and dust samples came from nasal cavity. These proportions were significantly higher than those in controls (2.70% and 3.86%) (P < 0.05). The same significantly higher transfer proportions(P < 0.05) were observed for Staphylococcus aureus enriched in the nasal cavity in AR children. Classification models by random forest regression at species levels showed, bacterial species enriched in indoor dust, nasal and dermal samples had substantial power in distinguishing AR children from healthy ones, with the highest power in the dust samples (AUC = 0.88) followed by nasal(AUC = 0.81) and dermal ones(AUC = 0.80). CONCLUSIONS: Our study presented the microbial enrichment characteristics in AR children both in the living environment(dust) and body sites exposed to environment through inhalation(nasal cavity), contact(skin) and ingestion(oral cavity) pathways, respectively. Nasal S.epidermidis and S.aureus had dominant influences on dust and other body sites in AR children.

Lichen sclerosus (LS) is a chronic inflammatory cicatricial skin disease that can lead to urethral stricture or even malignant transformation and the etiology is still unknown. This study comparatively analyzed the balanopreputial swab and urine microbiota simultaneously between male patients with LS urethral stricture (LSUS) and non-LS urethral stricture (non-LSUS). METHODS: We prospectively included 31 male patients with LSUS and 30 with non-LSUS in this case-control study. Midstream urine samples and balanopreputial swabs were collected from each patient for the 16S V3-V4 hypervariable region sequencing. Operational taxonomic units were defined using a > 97% sequence similarity threshold. We compared the differences in alpha diversity, beta diversity, and microbial structure between the two groups. RESULTS: Whether in swab or urine samples, there was no significant difference in alpha diversity between the two groups. Swab samples showed a significant difference in beta diversity (p = 0.001). For all individuals, composition analyses showed that the most abundant phyla were Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes in both samples. Additionally, the microbial communities of swab samples were significantly more similar to the communities of urine samples in the LSUS group (p = 0.047). CONCLUSIONS: Microbiota showed significant variation between LSUS and non-LSUS groups, suggesting that microecological imbalance may be closely related to the occurrence of LS. Urinary irritation may be related to the unique microbiota on the genital skin of patients with LSUS.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa is able to survive, grow, and cause severe infections at different sites throughout the human body owing to its ability to sense diverse signals and precisely modulate target gene expression using its abundant signaling systems. Release of zinc (Zn) and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) within the phagocyte are two major host strategies to defend against bacterial infections. It was previously shown that the response regulator CzcR controls global gene expression including catalase genes during Zn excess, but regulatory mechanisms of catalase gene expression and the role of CzcR in H2O2 tolerance remain unclear. RESULTS: In the study, comparative transcriptome analysis comprehensively described the CzcR-dependent and -independent gene regulatory pattern in P. aeruginosa during Zn excess, which revealed the counteractive co-regulation of two key H2O2-detoxifying catalase genes katA and katB through CzcR-dependent and -independent pathways in response to Zn excess. Protein-DNA interaction assay demonstrated that CzcR negatively regulates the expression of catalase genes katA and katB by directly binding to their promoters. While interestingly, we further showed that CzcR positively regulates H2O2 tolerance by inducing the catalase activity during Zn excess. CONCLUSION: This study reported the opposite functions of CzcR in negatively regulating the expression of catalase genes katA and katB but in positively regulating the activity of catalase and H2O2 tolerance during Zn excess in P. aeruginosa.

Peritoneal dialysis-related peritonitis (PDRP) is one of the most common complications of peritoneal dialysis (PD). Understanding the risk factors and etiological characteristics is indispensable for infection prevention and improving the outcome and life quality. METHODS: A total of 70 PD patients were separated into the PDRP group (n=25) and the control group (n=45). Variables, including gender, age, body mass index, primary diseases, and history of basic diseases, in the two groups were analyzed to assess the risk factors of PDRP. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) and microbial culture were compared in detecting pathogenic microorganisms. Gut microbiota analysis was performed in 35 PDRP patients based on mNGS data. RESULTS: Dialysis time and times of dialysate change were the risk factors of PDRP, and times of dialysate change was the independent risk factor of PDRP (p = 0.046). mNGS produced higher sensitivity (65.79%) than microbial culture (36.84%) in identifying pathogenic microorganisms. Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae (four cases) were the most frequent pathogens causing PDRP, followed by Staphylococcus capitis (three cases). β diversity of the gut microbiota was significantly different between patients with fewer times of dialysate change (≤4) and more (>5), as well as between patients with gram-positive (G+) bacterial and gram-negative (G-) bacterial infection. CONCLUSION: The dialysis time and times of dialysate changes not only are risk factors for peritonitis in PD patients but also stimulate significant changes in the gut microbiome structure in PDRP patients. These findings may provide a novel viewpoint for the management of patients with PDRP.

The aim of this study was to explore the microbial variations and biomarkers in the oral environment of patients with persistent pulmonary nodules (pPNs) and to reveal the potential biological functions of the salivary microbiota in pPNs. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included a total of 483 participants (141 healthy controls and 342 patients with pPNs) from June 2022 and January 2024. Saliva samples were subjected to sequencing of the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene to assess microbial diversity and differential abundance. Seven advanced machine learning algorithms (logistic regression, support vector machine, multi-layer perceptron, naïve Bayes, random forest, gradient boosting decision tree, and LightGBM) were utilized to evaluate performance and identify key microorganisms, with fivefold cross-validation employed to ensure robustness. The Shapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm was employed to explain the contribution of these core microbiotas to the predictive model. Additionally, the PICRUSt2 algorithm was used to predict the microbial functions. RESULTS: The salivary microbial composition in pPNs group showed significantly lower α- and β-diversity compared to healthy controls. A high-accuracy LightGBM model was developed, identifying six core genera-Fusobacterium, Solobacterium, Actinomyces, Porphyromonas, Atopobium, and Peptostreptococcus-as pPNs biomarkers. Additionally, a visualization pPNs risk prediction system was developed. The immune responses and metabolic activities differences in salivary microbiota between the patients with pPNs and healthy controls were revealed. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the potential clinical applications of the salivary microbiota for enable earlier detection and targeted interventions, offering significant promise for advancing clinical management and improving patient outcomes in pPNs.

Noninvasive sampling and 16S rRNA high-throughput sequencing were used to compare the composition and function of the gut microbiota of three dog breeds: the Chinese Kunming dog (CKD), German Shepherd dog (GSD), and Belgian Malinois dog (BMD). RESULTS: The gut microbiota of the three dog breeds consisted of 257 species across 146 genera, 60 families, 35 orders, 15 classes, and 10 phyla. The dominant bacterial phyla across the three breeds were Firmicutes (57.44%), Fusobacteriota (28.86%), and Bacteroidota (7.63%), while the dominant bacterial genera across the three breeds were Peptostreptococcus (21.08%), Fusobacterium (18.50%), Lactobacillus (12.37%), and Cetobacter (10.29%). Further analysis revealed significant differences in the intestinal flora of the three breeds at the phylum and genus levels. The intestinal flora of BMD was significantly richer than that of CKD and GSD. The functional prediction and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed that the primary functions of the gut microbiota in these breeds were similar, with significant enrichment in various metabolic pathways, including carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and microbial metabolism in different environments. The intestinal flora of these breeds also played a crucial role in genetic information processing, including transcription, translation, replication, and material transport. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These results provide novel insights into the intestinal flora of intervention dogs and suggest novel methods to improve their health status, which help increase microbial diversity and normalize metabolite production in diseased dogs.

In the American Gut Project Database, 361 individuals (without troubled by disease recently) with less than 6 h of sleep per day were obtained and matched with normal sleep time individuals according to gender, age, and BMI. Furthermore, the raw data of 16s rRNA in feces were downloaded and analyzed using QIIME2, and STAMP was used for data statistics. PICRUST2 was used for predicting the alteration of microbial function. RESULTS: The SSD did not affect the microbial α-diversity. SSD increased the abundance of the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the families Rikenellaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and S24-7, and decrased the Coriobacteriaceae. Moreover, PICRUST2 predicted that SSD affected 15 metabolic pathways. Subgroup analyses showed that SSD had more significant effects on the microbiota in normal-weight females. CONCLUSION: SSD substantially modifies the abundance of specific gut microbiota taxa, exerting a pronounced influence particularly on females, highlighting the need for further investigation into the bidirectional relationship between sleep patterns and gut microbiota.

A systematic evaluation was performed based on PRISMA guidelines. Three independent reviewers searched for relevant literature in several databases, including PubMed/Medline, Web of Science, and Scopus, with a search date ranging from the establishment of the databases to June 2024. RESULTS: A total of 1278 publications were initially screened, including five cross-sectional studies, seven case-control studies, one cohort study, and one retrospective study. These studies included a total of 3335 patients with MAFLD, 254 patients with MASH, and 105 patients with liver cirrhosis. All 14 included studies concluded that there was a correlation or potential correlation between oral microbiota and MAFLD. Seven studies found that the composition of the oral microbiota in MAFLD patients differed from that of healthy controls, and specific oral bacteria may be associated with an increased incidence of MAFLD. At the phylum level, several studies found differences in the abundance of the phyla Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Clostridia compared to healthy controls. Additionally, a study on oral fungi found significant differences in the phyla Proteobacteria and in the genus Staphylococcus between patients with MAFLD and healthy controls. At the genus level, Porphyromonas was studied most frequently, with all 8 studies identifying infection with Porphyromonas as a significant risk factor for pathological progression in MAFLD. Furthermore, a dysbiosis in the ratio of Porphyromonas gingivalis./Porphyromonas anomalies may be an important marker of MAFLD progression. CONCLUSION: There is an important association between the diversity of oral microbiota composition and MAFLD. This finding suggests the importance of oral health assessment and monitoring for the prevention or intervention of MAFLD.

Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging remain unknown. METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging. CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential therapeutic targets.

The preservation of soil health is a critical challenge in the 21st century due to its significant impact on agriculture, human health, and biodiversity. We provide one of the first comprehensive investigations into the predictive potential of machine learning models for understanding the connections between soil and biological phenotypes. We investigate an integrative framework performing accurate machine learning-based prediction of plant performance from biological, chemical, and physical properties of the soil via two models: random forest and Bayesian neural network. RESULTS: Prediction improves when we add environmental features, such as soil properties and microbial density, along with microbiome data. Different preprocessing strategies show that human decisions significantly impact predictive performance. We show that the naive total sum scaling normalization that is commonly used in microbiome research is one of the optimal strategies to maximize predictive power. Also, we find that accurately defined labels are more important than normalization, taxonomic level, or model characteristics. ML performance is limited when humans can't classify samples accurately. Lastly, we provide domain scientists via a full model selection decision tree to identify the human choices that optimize model prediction power. CONCLUSIONS: Our study highlights the importance of incorporating diverse environmental features and careful data preprocessing in enhancing the predictive power of machine learning models for soil and biological phenotype connections. This approach can significantly contribute to advancing agricultural practices and soil health management.

We used Miseq Illumina high-throughput sequencing technology to study the microbial community in the rhizosphere soil of healthy and diseased C. cathayensis, quantified the abundance of bacteria, fungi, and pathogenic fungi, and combined these with soil chemistry and enzyme activity indicators to analyze the characteristics of healthy and diseased rhizosphere soils. RESULTS: We found that the pH, soil organic carbon(SOC), available nitrogen (AN), available phosphorus (AP), available potassium (AK),N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) β-glucosidase (BG), fungal gene copy number, bacterial community diversity and network complexity of the diseased soil were significantly lower (p < 0.05), while Fusarium graminearum copies number levels increased (p < 0.05). Additionally, the study found that healthy soils were enriched with beneficial bacteria such as Subgroup_7 (0.08%), MND1 (0.29%), SWB02 (0.08%), and Bradyrhizobium (0.09%), as well as potential pathogen-suppressing fungi such as Mortierella (0.13%), Preussia (0.03%), and Humicol (0.37%), were found to be associated with the growth and development of C. cathayensis. DISCUSSION: In summary, this research comprehensively reveals the differences in environmental and biological factors between healthy and diseased soils, as well as their correlations. It provides a theoretical basis for optimal soil environmental regulation and the construction of healthy microbial communities. This foundation facilitates the development of multifaceted strategies for the prevention and control of C. cathayensis root rot.

Over the past years, there has been a significant increase in the incidence of Mycoplasma pneumoniae (MP) infections, particularly among pediatric patients, nationwide. An emerging body of research has established a link between dysbiosis of the host microbiome and the metabolic functioning of the host, which contributes to the development of respiratory diseases. METHODS: A total of 25 children were included in the study, comprising 15 pneumonia patients and 10 healthy children. Stool samples were collected from all participants to analyze the 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene, while serum samples were prepared for untargeted metabolomics to qualitatively and quantitatively assess short-chain fatty acids. RESULTS: The gut microbial composition of individuals with Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia (MPP) exhibited significant differences compared to healthy children. Notably, diseased children demonstrated higher microbial diversity and an enrichment of opportunistic pathogens, such as Erysipelatoclostridium and Eggerthella. Analysis revealed elevated levels of two specific short-chain fatty acids, namely acetic acid and isobutyric acid, in the MPP group, suggesting their potential as biomarkers for predicting MP infection. Metabolomic signature analysis identified a significant increase in major classes of glycerophospholipids in the MPP group. Moreover, we identified a total of 750 significant correlations between gut microbiota and circulating serum metabolites. MPP enriched genera Erysipelatoclostridium and Eggerthella, exhibited negative associations with indole-3-butyric acid. Additionally, Eggerthella showed a positive correlation with inflammatory metabolites LPC (18:0). DISCUSSION: Collectively, these findings provide novel insights into the selection of potential biomarkers and the pathogenesis of MPP in children based on the gut microbiota and systemic circulating metabolites.

A mouse model of colitis was established using 3.0% dextran sulfate sodium (DSS). Following the induction of colitis, mice were treated via tail vein injection with either conventional PDLSC-derived EVs (P-EVs) or LPS-pretreated PDLSC-derived EVs (LPS pre-EVs). The EVs were characterized using transmission electron microscopy, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and Western blot analysis. The therapeutic effects and mechanisms were evaluated through a combination of small animal live imaging, disease activity index (DAI) scoring, histopathological staining, qRT-PCR, 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and mass spectrometry analysis. RESULTS: The LPS pre-EVs exhibited typical EVs characteristics in terms of morphology, particle size distribution, and marker protein expression. Compared to P-EVs, LPS pre-EVs significantly ameliorated weight loss, DAI scores, colon length, and perianal symptoms in DSS-induced murine colitis. Additionally, LPS pre-EVs up-regulated the expression of Arginase-1, a typical M2 macrophage marker, and tight junction proteins, including ZO-1, Occludin, and Claudin-1, enhanced gut microbial diversity, and significantly regulated intestinal protein expression and activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: LPS pre-EVs exhibit significant anti-inflammatory and tissue repair effects in a mouse model of colitis. The underlying mechanisms may involve the regulation of macrophage polarization, maintenance of intestinal barrier function, modulation of the gut microbiota, and activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

There is a growing interest in understanding the association between the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration in an experimental colitis model. METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted. RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal linings. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

One hundred and two participants, including 33 healthy controls, 41 patients with gingivitis, and 28 patients with periodontitis, were included in this cross-sectional study. Salivary oral microbiomes were investigated using 16S rRNA metagenomic sequencing, and the microbial profiles of each group were compared using age- and sex-adjusted general linear models. RESULTS: The abundance of amplicon sequence variants and Chao1 diversity were significantly elevated in the gingivitis and periodontitis groups relative to healthy controls (p = 0.046). Based on linear discriminant analysis (LDA) scores (>2), Tenericutes, Mollicutes, Mycoplasmatales, Mycoplasmataceae, Mycoplasma, Bacteroidaceae, and Phocaeicola were significantly enriched in the gingivitis group, and Synergistetes, Synergistia, Synergistales, Synergistaceae, Fretibacterium, Sinanaerobacter, and Filifactor were enriched in the periodontitis group. The relative abundances of Fretibacterium fastidiosum, Sinanaerobacter chloroacetimidivorans, and Filifactor alocis (q = 0.008, all bacteria) were highest in the periodontitis group and lowest in the control group. The relative abundance of Treponema denticola was significantly elevated in the periodontitis group compared to the other two groups (q = 0.024). CONCLUSIONS: Oral microbiomes differed between groups. T. denticola, F. fastidiosum, S. chloroacetimidivorans and F. alocis were significantly more abundant in the periodontitis group than in the control group. Additionally, the abundance of T. denticola and F. fastidiosum in the periodontitis group was significantly different from that in the gingivitis group.

Tea leaf blight leads to an increase in bacterial diversity in the rhizosphere. Random processes dominate the assembly of abundant and rare taxa, while abundant taxa are also influenced by deterministic processes. In the co-occurrence network, the increase in bacterial community diversity mediated by tea cloud leaf blight enhances the stability of the network. Meanwhile, the proportion of positive correlation between rare taxa is relatively high, and the relationship between rare taxa and intermediate taxa is closer. This highly diverse bacteria community maintained the structure and stability of the community to a certain extent. CONCLUSION: The rare taxa in the rhizosphere and the rhizosphere bacterial community mediated by tea leaf blight have high diversity, which is of great significance for maintaining the stability of the rhizosphere bacterial ecological network. In the future, we will further explore the dynamic changes and interaction patterns of the species in the rhizosphere soil affected by tea tree diseases, and their ecological functions and importance in areas of habitat fragmentation. Overall, there are many microbial resources in the rhizosphere microbiota under the influence of plant diseases that can be used for agricultural practice. The results of this study will enrich the insights into ecodynamics of bacteria in karst areas, especially in karst tea gardens.

Polymorphic light eruption (PLE) is the most frequent photodermatosis in Europe with an estimated prevalence of 10 to 20%, particularly in temperate climates. Itching or burning lesions appear only in sun-exposed areas, predominantly on the chest, the arms and forearms within a few hours following exposure. The disease's cause is still unknown, yet studies have suggested that skin microbial elements may play a role in its pathogenesis. OBJECTIVES: We investigated in this cohort the skin microbiome of PLE patients upon exposure to ultraviolet radiation (UVR), to assess its role in the onset of PLE lesions. METHODS: Forty-one skin swabs have been collected from eleven PLE patients at baseline and following a three-day exposure to UVR and from healthy controls. The collected swabs were analyzed for their microbial composition using a 16S amplicon sequencing approach. RESULTS: The PLE skin showed a dysbalanced microbiome, already at baseline, with significantly reduced microbial diversity and noticeable colonization by bacterial pathogens as Staphylococcus aureus. Upon UVR exposure, the PLE microbiome exhibited a further loss of diversity and decline of beneficial skin commensals. In line with this, we observed that UVR exerted strong antimicrobial effects in vitro against representative skin residents. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, UVR can lead to profound skin microbiome changes, allowing the proliferation of dysbiotic members that can release a variety of elements able to trigger PLE lesions. This is the first study investigating the cutaneous microbiome changes in PLE patients upon UVR, offering new insights into disease pathogenesis, so far unexplored.

Microscopic colitis (MC) is a common cause of chronic diarrhea, predominantly among older adults. Emerging evidence suggests that perturbations of gut microbiome and metabolome may play an important role in MC pathogenesis. OBJECTIVE: To comprehensively characterize alterations of the gut microbial and metabolic composition in MC. DESIGN: We established a longitudinal cohort of adult patients with MC and two control groups of individuals - chronic diarrhea controls and age- and sex-matched controls without diarrhea. Using stool samples, gut microbiome was analyzed by whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing, and gut metabolome was profiled by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Per-feature enrichment analyses of microbial species, metabolic pathways, and metabolites were done using multivariable linear models both cross-sectionally comparing MC to controls and longitudinally according to disease activity. Lastly, we performed multi-omics association analyses to assess the relationship between microbiome and metabolome data. RESULTS: We included 683 participants, 131 with active MC (66 with both active and remission samples), 159 with chronic diarrhea, and 393 age- and sex-matched controls without diarrhea. The stool microbiome in active MC was characterized by a lower alpha diversity as compared to controls and the remission phase of MC. Compared to controls, we identified eight enriched species in MC, most of which were pro-inflammatory oral-typical species, such as Veillonella dispar and Haemophilus parainfluenzae . In contrast, 11 species, including anti-inflammatory microbes such as Blautia glucerasea and Bacteroides stercoris, were depleted in MC. Similarly, pro-inflammatory metabolites, including lactosylceramides, ceramides, lysophospholipids, and lysoplasmalogens were enriched in active MC as compared to controls or MC cases in remission. Multi-omics association analyses revealed strong and concordant links between microbes, their metabolic pathways, and metabolomic profiles, supporting the tight interplay between disturbances in stool microbiome and metabolome in MC. CONCLUSION: We observed a significant shift in stool microbial and metabolomic composition in MC. Our findings could be used in the future for development of non-invasive biomarkers for diagnosing and monitoring MC and developing novel therapeutics. WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC: Microbiome dysbiosis has been proposed to contribute to microscopic colitis (MC) pathogenesis.However, previous studies have been limited by small sample sizes, reliance on 16S rRNA sequencing technique, potential confounding by stool consistency, and lack of functional analyses of microbiome and longitudinal data. Moreover, the metabolomic composition of MC remain largely unknown. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS: In this largest longitudinal MC cohort with two control groups - chronic diarrhea controls and controls without diarrhea, gut microbiome of MC is characterized by a lower alpha diversity, enriched pro-inflammatory oral-typical species and depleted anti-inflammatory beneficial species.Gut metabolome of MC shows significant enrichment of pro-inflammatory metabolites, including lactosylceramides, ceramides, lysophospholipids, and lysoplasmalogens. Multi-omics analyses demonstrate strong and concordant relationships between microbes, metabolic pathways, and metabolomic profiles. HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH PRACTICE OR POLICY: Our findings could facilitate development of non-invasive biomarkers and novel therapeutics for MC.

The association between alterations in the oral microbiome and hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) has been observed in previous studies. Our study, therefore, aimed to identify the structural changes in the oral microbiota and biomarkers in children with HFMD caused by enterovirus A 71 (EV-A71). METHODS: Children diagnosed with EV-A71 HFMD and healthy children recruited from April 2021 to September 2023 were included in the present study, and were categorized into EV-A71 and control groups, respectively. Oral swabs were collected and microbiota information was obtained using 16 S rRNA gene sequencing technology. Alpha-diversity and partial least squares discriminant analyses were conducted to compare microbial diversity, richness, and similarity between the two groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size was employed to identify microbial taxa with significant differences, and determined the key genera among them. RESULTS: The study included a total of 80 children, with 50 assigned to the EV-A71 group and 30 to the control group. No significant differences were found between the two groups in terms of age (2.2 ± 1.2 vs. 2.7 ± 1.2 years; age range: 1-5 years; P = 0.114) or sex (56% vs. 60% boys, P = 0.726). The oral microbiota structure in the EV-A71 group differed from that in the control group. The EV-A71 group showed significant reductions in both the Shannon index (P = 0.037) and the abundance-based coverage estimator (ACE) index (P < 0.001). The key genus changes were marked by a significant decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga (P = 0.002) and Leptotrichia (P = 0.033) in the EV-A71 group. CONCLUSION: In children with EV-A71 HFMD, the oral microbiota showed changes in composition, with a significant reduction in diversity and richness. The changes in key genera were a marked decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga and Leptotrichia.

Experimental kidney disease was created using adenine feeding and subtotal nephrectomy in rats, and by adenine feeding in mice. Loss of periodontal bone height was assessed using a dissecting microscope supported by micro-CT, light, confocal and electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. Salivary biochemistry was assessed using NMR spectroscopy. The oral microbiome was evaluated using culture-based and molecular methods, and the transmissibility of dysbiosis was assessed using co-caging and microbial transfer experiments into previously germ-free recipient mice. RESULTS: We demonstrate that experimental kidney disease causes a reproducible reduction of alveolar bone height, without gingival inflammation or overt hyperparathyroidism but with evidence of failure of bone formation at the periodontal crest. We show that kidney disease alters the biochemical composition of saliva and induces progressive dysbiosis of the oral microbiota, with microbial samples from animals with kidney disease displaying reduced overall bacterial growth, increased alpha diversity, reduced abundance of key components of the healthy oral microbiota such as Streptococcus and Rothia, and an increase in minor taxa including those from gram-negative phyla Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Co-housing diseased rats with healthy ones ameliorates the periodontal disease phenotype, whilst transfer of oral microbiota from mice with kidney disease causes periodontal disease in germ-free animals with normal kidney function. CONCLUSIONS: We advocate that periodontal disease should be regarded as a complication of kidney disease, initiated by oral dysbiosis through mechanisms independent of overt inflammation or hyperparathyroidism.

The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has emerged as a global health crisis, with clinical manifestations including those suggesting injury to various organs such as the ovaries, which implies that it extends beyond respiratory infections. Changes in gut microbiota may exhibit correlations with the mechanisms and stages of severity in COVID-19, as well as a link with sex hormones, embryo development, and pregnancy. Controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) is used to induce the development of multiple high-quality follicles during in vitro fertilization (IVF). Our research aimed to investigate whether patients infected with COVID-19 have altered gut microbiota compositions that would affect the outcomes of COS. METHODS: Twenty-one healthy females and seventeen patients with COVID-19 were enrolled. Samples were sequenced for gut microbiota identification through 16 S rRNA V3-V4 region, including species annotation, community diversity, and community functions. RESULTS: No significant differences were found between the groups in terms of in IVF cycle outcomes and laboratory parameters. Patients with COVID-19 and healthy women showed no significant difference in the total number of available blastocyst embryos. Furthermore, the gut microbiota alpha diversity index in the COVID-19 group were markedly reduced compared to those of healthy females. Comparing the COVID-19 group to the controls, the gut microbiota dysbiosis decreased levels of Ruminococcus, and Agathobater, and elevated levels of Achromobacter and Raistonia. Finally, we identified a series of microbial functional characteristics, including membrane transport and carbohydrate metabolism, that exhibited significant disparities between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Patients in the COVID-19 group exhibited significant disparities in the gut microbiota composition compared to the healthy women during COS. However, the IVF outcomes did not show any significant differences between the two groups. Collectively, our speculation suggests that SARS-COV-2 infection may alter the gut microbiota without impacting IVF outcomes.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in Enterobacterales constitutes a significant threat to the health of both humans and animals and a socioeconomic problem. Enterobacterales, mainly Escherichia coli, carrying β-lactamases has become one of the main indicators to estimate the burden of AMR in animals within "One Health" approach. OBJECTIVES: To assess the presence of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacterales associated with ruminants (cattle, sheep, goats) habituated in all five provinces of Rwanda and to perform in depth characterization of isolates. METHODS: We screened 454 rectal swabs from 203 cows, 170 goats, and 81 sheep and selective isolation of extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacterales was conducted. Isolates were identified as a members of the order Enterobacterales by MALDI-TOF MS and further characterized by susceptibility testing and by whole-genome sequencing. RESULTS: Out of the 454 samples, 64 extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant Enterobacterales were isolated from 58 animals. Isolates belonged to seven bacterial species and were identified as Escherichia coli (n = 54), Enterobacter bugandensis (n = 4), Enterobacter mori (n = 2), Klebsiella pneumoniae (n = 2), Enterobacter dykesii (n = 1), and Citrobacter freundii (n = 1). All isolates displayed an Extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL) phenotype, with exception of Citrobacter freundii isolate displayed both an ESBL and AmpC phenotype. In addition, all Enterobacter isolates were identified as stably de-repressed AmpC-producers. ESBLs genes, blaCTX-M-15 was predominant. Resistance to tetracycline and tet(A) was most frequently observed among non-β-lactam resistance. Forty-eight isolates displayed multidrug-resistance phenotypes. A shiga toxin-producing E. coli and an enterotoxigenic E. coli isolate were observed. Genome comparisons revealed thirty-five E. coli sequence types (ST) (ST10, ST307 being predominate). CONCLUSIONS: Considering the high proximity between ruminants and humans in Rwanda, the dissemination of antimicrobial drug resistance highlights the public health threats and requires the joint and multisectoral action of human and veterinary medicine, at human-animal-environment interfaces. Therefore, it is important to establish national and global "One Health" surveillance programs of AMR to tackle the antibiotic-resistant crisis in human and veterinary medicine.

Sustainable agriculture increasingly emphasizes the importance of microbial communities in influencing plant health and productivity. In viticulture, understanding the impact of management practices on fungal communities is critical, given their role in disease dynamics, grape and wine quality. This study investigates the effects of integrated, organic, and biodynamic management practices on the diversity and function of fungal communities in a vineyard located in Geisenheim, Germany, focusing on above-ground parts such as bark, leaves, and grapes. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that while overall fungal species richness did not significantly differ among management systems across various compartments, the composition of these communities was distinctly influenced by the type of management system. In particular, leaf and grape compartments showed notable variations in fungal community structure between integrated and organic/biodynamic management. No differences were observed between organic and biodynamic management. Integrated management demonstrated a significantly higher abundance of mycoparasites in comparison to organic and biodynamic management, primarily attributed to the increased presence of Sporobolomyces roseus, Sporobolomyces ellipsoideus and Rhodotorula glutinis. CONCLUSIONS: The findings highlight the importance of management practices in shaping fungal community composition and function in vineyards. Although overall species richness remained unaffected, community composition and functional diversity varied, highlighting the potential for strategic microbiome management to enhance vineyard sustainability and plant health.

The brown planthopper (BPH) is an economically significant pest of rice. Bph3 is a key BPH resistance gene. However, the proteomic response of rice to BPH infestation, both in the presence and absence of Bph3, remains largely unexplored. RESULTS: In this study, we employed tandem mass tag labeling in conjunction with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in rice samples. We detected 265 and 125 DEPs via comparison of samples infected with BPH for 2 and 4 days with untreated samples of the BPH-sensitive line R582. For the Bph3 introgression line R373, we identified 29 and 94 DEPs in the same comparisons. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that Bph3 significantly influences the abundance of proteins associated with metabolic pathways, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, microbial metabolism in diverse environments, and phenylpropanoid biosynthesis. Moreover, Bph3 regulates the activity of proteins involved in the calcium signaling pathway, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway, and plant hormone signal transduction. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that Bph3 enhances the resistance of rice to BPH mainly by inhibiting the down-regulation of proteins associated with metabolic pathways; calcium signaling, the MAPK signaling pathway, and plant hormone signal transduction might also be involved in BPH resistance induced by Bph3.

The increasing incidence of childhood obesity annually has led to a surge in physical and mental health risks, making it a significant global public health concern. This study aimed to discover novel biomarkers of childhood simple obesity through integrative multi-omics analysis, uncovering their potential connections and providing fresh research directions for the complex pathogenesis and treatment strategies. METHODS: Transcriptome, untargeted metabolome, and 16 S rDNA sequencing were conducted on subjects to examine transcripts, metabolites in blood, and gut microflora in stool. RESULTS: Transcriptomic analysis identified 599 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), of which 25 were immune-related genes, and participated in immune pathways such as antimicrobial peptides, neutrophil degranulation, and interferons. The optimal random forest model based on these genes exhibited an AUC of 0.844. The metabolomic analysis examined 71 differentially expressed metabolites (DEMs), including 12 immune-related metabolites. Notably, lauric acid showed an extremely strong positive correlation with BMI and showed a good discriminative power for obesity (AUC = 0.82). DEMs were found to be significantly enriched in four metabolic pathways, namely "Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis", "Valine leucine and isoleucine biosynthesis, and Glycine", "Serine and threonine metabolism", and "Biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids". Microbiome analysis revealed 12 differential gut microbiotas (DGMs) at the phylum and genus levels, with p_Firmicutes dominating in the obese group and g_Escherichia-Shigella in the normal group. Subsequently, a Random Forest model was developed based on the DEMs, immune-related DEGs, and metabolites with an AUC value of 0.912. The 14 indicators identified by this model could potentially serve as a set of biomarkers for obesity. The analysis of the inter-omics correlation network found 233 pairs of significant correlations. DEGs BPIFA1, BPI, and SAA1, DEMs Dimethy(tetradecyl)amine, Deoxycholic acid, Pathalic anhydride, and DL-Alanine, and DGMs g_Intestinimonas and g_Turicibacter showed strong connectivity within the network, constituting a large proportion of interactions. CONCLUSION: This study presents the first comprehensive description of the multi-omics characteristics of childhood simple obesity, recognizing promising biomarkers. Immune-related markers offer a new perspective for researching the immunological mechanisms underlying obesity and its associated complications. The revealed interactions among these biomarkers contribute to a deeper understanding the intricate biological regulatory networks associated with obesity.

The gut microbiome is recognized as a pivotal factor in the pathophysiology of sarcopenia-a condition marked by the accelerated loss of muscle strength, mass and function with ageing. Despite this well-known gut-muscle axis, the potential links between other microbial ecosystems and sarcopenia remain largely unexplored. The oral microbiome has been linked to various age-related health conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis and colorectal cancer. However, its potential association with sarcopenia is unknown. The Saliva and Muscle (SaMu) study seeks to address this knowledge gap. METHODS: The SaMu study comprises three sequential phases. In phase 1, a cross-sectional analysis will be conducted on a cohort of 200 individuals aged 70 years or older to examine the relationship between salivary microbiome and sarcopenia status. Participants will be recruited in the three main places of living: general community, assisted living facilities and nursing homes. The salivary microbiome composition will be evaluated utilizing shotgun metagenomics sequencing, while sarcopenia status will be determined through muscle mass (determined by whole-body bioelectrical impedance analysis and calf circumference), muscle strength (grip strength and the 5-times-sit-to-stand test) and physical performance (usual walking speed). In addition to investigating the microbiome composition, the study aims to elucidate microbiome functions by exploring potential omic associations with sarcopenia. To achieve this, salivary proteomics, metabolomics and quorum sensing peptidomics will be performed. Covariates that will be measured include clinical variables (sociodemographic factors, health status, health-related behaviours, oral health and quality of life) as well as blood variables (immune profiling, hormones, kidney and liver function, electrolytes and haematocrit). In phase 2, an in-depth mechanistic analysis will be performed on an envisaged subcohort of 50 participants. This analysis will explore pathways in muscle tissue using histology, genomics and transcriptomics, focusing on (maximal) 25 healthy older adults and (maximal) 25 with severe sarcopenia. Phase 3 involves a two-year clinical follow-up of the initial participants from the cross-sectional analysis, along with a resampling of blood and saliva. Additionally, secondary outcomes like falls, hospitalization and mortality will be examined. DISCUSSION: Using a salivary multi-omics approach, SaMu primarily aims to clarify the associations between the oral microbiome and sarcopenia. SaMu is expected to contribute to the discovery of predictive biomarkers of sarcopenia as well as to the identification of potential novel targets to prevent/tackle sarcopenia. This study-protocol is submitted for registration at the ISRCTN registry.

This study adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines. Relevant articles published before March 6, 2024, were identified through systematic searches of PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science. We included experimental studies that investigated changes in the gut microbiota of CS-born infants following VS and reported changes in the gut microbiota. The relationship between VS and the gut microbiota composition of CS-born infants was assessed. RESULTS: VS may selectively influence the abundance of bacterial genera from various phyla, such as an increased relative abundance of Bacteroides and Lactobacillus, in the gut microbiome of CS-seeded infants compared to CS-non-seeded infants. Conflicting results mainly concern microbial diversity. CONCLUSIONS: Current evidence indicates modest changes in the gut microbiome of CS-born infants following VS. However, further clinical studies are necessary to fully understand its impact on early-life health outcomes, particularly regarding potential microbiome alterations and associated health risks.

Gut bacteria are related to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). However, there is inconsistency in ICI-associated species, while the role of non-bacterial microbes in immunotherapy remains elusive. Here, we evaluated the association of trans-kingdom microbes with ICIs by multi-cohort multi-cancer analyses. METHODS: We retrieved fecal metagenomes from 1,359 ICI recipients with four different cancers (metastatic melanoma [MM], non-small cell lung carcinoma [NSCLC], renal cell cancer [RCC], and hepatocellular carcinoma) from 12 published datasets. Microbiota composition was analyzed using the Wilcoxon rank test. The performance of microbial biomarkers in predicting ICI response was assessed by random forest. Key responder-associated microbes were functionally examined in vitro and in mice. FINDINGS: Trans-kingdom gut microbiota (bacteria, eukaryotes, viruses, and archaea) was significantly different between ICI responders and non-responders in multi-cancer. Bacteria (Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Coprococcus comes) and eukaryotes (Nemania serpens, Hyphopichia pseudoburtonii) were consistently enriched in responders of ≥2 cancer types or from ≥3 cohorts, contrasting with the depleted bacterium Hungatella hathewayi. Responder-associated species in each cancer were revealed, such as F. prausnitzii in MM and 6 species in NSCLC. These signature species influenced ICI efficacy by modulating CD8+ T cell activity in vitro and in mice. Moreover, bacterial and eukaryotic biomarkers showed great performance in predicting ICI response in patients from discovery and two validation cohorts (MM: area under the receiver operating characteristic curve [AUROC] = 72.27%-80.19%; NSCLC: AUROC = 72.70%-87.98%; RCC: AUROC = 83.33%-89.58%). CONCLUSIONS: This study identified trans-kingdom microbial signatures associated with ICI in multi-cancer and specific cancer types. Trans-kingdom microbial biomarkers are potential predictors of ICI response in patients with cancer. FUNDING: Funding information is shown in the acknowledgments.

Growing evidence indicates that trimethylamine N-oxide, a gut microbial metabolite of dietary choline and carnitine, promotes both cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease risk. It remains unclear how circulating concentrations of trimethylamine N-oxide and its related dietary and gut microbe-derived metabolites (choline, betaine, carnitine, γ-butyrobetaine, and crotonobetaine) affect incident heart failure (HF). METHODS: We evaluated 11 768 participants from the Cardiovascular Health Study and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis with serial measures of metabolites. Cox proportional hazard models were used to examine the associations between metabolites and incident HF, adjusted for cardiovascular disease risk factors. RESULTS: In all, 2102 cases of HF occurred over a median follow-up of 15.9 years. After adjusting for traditional risk factors, higher concentrations of trimethylamine N-oxide (hazard ratio, 1.15 [95% CI, 1.09-1.20]; P<0.001), choline (hazard ratio, 1.44 [95% CI, 1.26-1.64]; P<0.001), and crotonobetaine (hazard ratio, 1.24 [95% CI, 1.16-1.32]; P<0.001) were associated with increased risk for incident HF. After further adjustment for renal function (potential confounder or mediator), these associations did not reach Bonferroni-corrected statistical significance (P=0.01, 0.049, and 0.006, respectively). Betaine and carnitine were nominally associated with a higher incidence of HF (P<0.05). In exploratory analyses, results were similar for subtypes of HF based on left ventricular ejection fraction, and associations appeared generally stronger among Black and Hispanic/Latino versus White adults, although there were no interactions for any metabolites with race. CONCLUSIONS: In this pooled analysis of 2 well-phenotyped, diverse, community-based cohorts, circulating concentrations of gut microbe-derived metabolites such as trimethylamine N-oxide, choline, and crotonobetaine were independently associated with a higher risk of developing HF. REGISTRATION: URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov/; Unique identifiers: NCT00005133 and NCT00005487.

Gastric cancer (GC), particularly for advanced stage of GC, commonly undergoes peritoneal metastasis (PM), which is the leading cause of GC-related death. However, there currently has no reliable biomarker to predict the onset of GCPM. It is well known that the imbalance of gut microbiota contributes to the development and metastasis of gastrointestinal tumors. Unfortunately, little is known about how the alternation in gut microbiota is associated with the onset of GCPM. METHODS: Our current study analyzed structural characteristics and functional prediction of gut microbiota in GC patients with PM (PM group) and without PM (non-PM group). Fresh fecal samples were collected from a discovery cohort (PM = 38, non-PM = 54) and a validation cohort (PM = 15, non-PM = 21) of GC patients and their 16S ribosomal RNA (16s rRNA) gene amplicons were sequenced, followed by bioinformatics. RESULTS: The results indicated an increase in the biodiversity of gut microbiota in the non-PM group of the discovery cohort, compared with the PM group. Moreover, LEfSe analysis found 31 significantly different microorganisms, of which the Roseburia ranked the fifth in the random forest (RF) model. The characteristics of intestinal microbiota in GCPM patients were changed, and the abundance of Roseburia in gut microbiota from the GCPM patients was reduced and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis revealed that the reduced abundance of gut Roseburia effectively predicted the onset of GCPM. CONCLUSION: This signature was also observed in the validation cohort. Therefore, Roseburia is a protective microbial marker and the reduced abundance of Roseburia in gut microbiota may help early diagnosis of GCPM.

Postpartum depression (PPD) is a common complication of pregnancy that imposes a heavy health and economic burden on individuals, families and society. The etiology of PPD is complex and incompletely defined, and recent studies have identified an important role for gut microbiota (GM) and their metabolites in neurological disorders. However, fewer studies on GM and PPD are available and have not yielded uniform results. METHODS: Instrumental variables for GM and blood metabolites were obtained from the MiBioGen consortium and metabolomics GWAS server. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with PPD phenotypes were obtained from the FinnGen consortium. Inverse variance weighted (IVW), weighted median, weighted mode, and MR-Egger methods were used to assess causal effects. Inverse MR analysis and sensitivity analysis were also utilized to improve the stability of the results. RESULTS: In this study, 5 intestinal species and 24 blood metabolites causally associated with PPD were identified using MR analysis. In addition, MR analysis showed that Prevotellaceae and Bifidobacteria may reduce the risk of PPD by elevating Xanthine and 1-arachidonoylglycerophosphoinositol (LysoPI) levels. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified GM and blood metabolites causally associated with PPD. The results of this study may provide a theoretical basis for the discovery of PPD-related biomarkers and the treatment of the disease by regulating the gut microenvironment.

Many studies have investigated the intake of dietary isoflavones in relation to obesity risk, whereas the association using objective biomarkers of isoflavones, particularly equol (a gut-derived metabolite of daidzein with greater bioavailability than other isoflavones) has been less studied. In addition, the associations between equol and gut microbiota profile at the population level remain to be fully characterized. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to identify equol-predicting microbial species and to investigate the associations of equol-predicting microbial species and urinary excretion of isoflavones including glycitein, genistein, daidzein, and equol with diverse obesity markers in free living-individuals. METHODS: In this 1-y longitudinal study of 754 community-dwelling adults, urinary isoflavones, fecal microbiota, height, weight, and circumferences of waist and hip were measured at baseline and again after 1 y. Liver fat [indicated by the controlled attenuation parameter (CAP)] and other body composition were also measured after 1 y. Linear models and linear mixed-effects models were used to analyze the associations for single measure and repeated measures, respectively. RESULTS: Among 305 participants (median age: 50 y, IQR, 37-59 y) including 138 males and 167 females, higher urinary excretion of equol was associated with lower CAP (β = -0.013, P < 0.001) and body fat mass (β= -0.014, P = 0.046). No association was found between any other urinary isoflavones and obesity markers (all P > 0.05). We identified 21 bacterial genera whose relative abundance were positively associated with urinary equol concentrations (all Pfalsediscovery rate < 0.05), and constructed an equol-predicting microbial score to reflect the overall equol-producing potential of host gut microbiota. This score was inversely associated with CAP (β = -0.040, P = 0.011). CONCLUSIONS: High urinary equol concentrations and equol-predicting microbial species could be favorably associated with liver fat and other obesity markers.

More than 90% of colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from advanced adenomas (AA) and gut microbes are closely associated with the initiation and progression of both AA and CRC. OBJECTIVE: To analyze the characteristic microbes in AA. METHODS: Fecal samples were collected from 92 AA and 184 negative control (NC). Illumina HiSeq X sequencing platform was used for high-throughput sequencing of microbial populations. The sequencing results were annotated and compared with NCBI RefSeq database to find the microbial characteristics of AA. R-vegan package was used to analyze α diversity and β diversity. α diversity included box diagram, and β diversity included Principal Component Analysis (PCA), principal co-ordinates analysis (PCoA), and non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS). The AA risk prediction models were constructed based on six kinds of machine learning algorithms. In addition, unsupervised clustering methods were used to classify bacteria and viruses. Finally, the characteristics of bacteria and viruses in different subtypes were analyzed. RESULTS: The abundance of Prevotella sp900557255, Alistipes putredinis, and Megamonas funiformis were higher in AA, while the abundance of Lilyvirus, Felixounavirus, and Drulisvirus were also higher in AA. The Catboost based model for predicting the risk of AA has the highest accuracy (bacteria test set: 87.27%; virus test set: 83.33%). In addition, 4 subtypes (B1V1, B1V2, B2V1, and B2V2) were distinguished based on the abundance of gut bacteria and enteroviruses (EVs). Escherichia coli D, Prevotella sp900557255, CAG-180 sp000432435, Phocaeicola plebeiuA, Teseptimavirus, Svunavirus, Felixounavirus, and Jiaodavirus are the characteristic bacteria and viruses of 4 subtypes. The results of Catboost model indicated that the accuracy of prediction improved after incorporating subtypes. The accuracy of discovery sets was 100%, 96.34%, 100%, and 98.46% in 4 subtypes, respectively. CONCLUSION: Prevotella sp900557255 and Felixounavirus have high value in early warning of AA. As promising non-invasive biomarkers, gut microbes can become potential diagnostic targets for AA, and the accuracy of predicting AA can be improved by typing.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the 3rd most common cancer in the world and colonic carcinogenesis is a multifactorial disease that involves environmental and genetic factors. Gut microbiota plays a critical role in the regulation of intestinal homeostasis. Increasing evidence shows that the gut microbiome plays a role in CRC development and may be a biomarker for early diagnosis. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to determine the clinical prognostic significance of gut microbiota in CRC patients in the Turkish population by metagenomic analysis and to determine the microbial composition in tumor tissue biopsy samples. METHODS: Tissue biopsies were taken from the participants with sterile forceps during colonoscopy and stored at -80 °C. Then, DNA isolation was performed from the tissue samples and the V3-V4 region of the 16 S rRNA gene was sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform. Quality control of the obtained sequence data was performed. Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were classified according to the Greengenes database. Alpha diversity (Shannon index) and beta diversity (Bray-Curtis distance) analyses were performed. The most common bacterial species in CRC patients and healthy controls were determined and whether there were statistically significant differences between the groups was tested. RESULTS: A total of 40 individuals, 13 CRC patients and 20 healthy control individuals were included in our metagenomic study. The mean age of the patients was 64.83 and BMI was 25.85. In CRC patients, the level of Bacteroidetes at the phylum taxonomy was significantly increased (p = 0.04), the level of Clostridia at the class taxonomy was increased (p = 0.23), and the level of Enterococcus at the genus taxonomy was significantly increased (p = 0.01). When CRC patients were compared with the control group, significant increases were detected in the species of Gemmiger formicilis (p = 0.15), Prevotella copri (p = 0.02) and Ruminococcus bromii (p = 0.001) at the species taxonomy. CONCLUSIONS: Metagenomic analysis of intestinal microbiota composition in CRC patients provides important data for determining the treatment options for these patients. The results of this study suggest that it may be beneficial in terms of early diagnosis, poor prognosis and survival rates in CRC patients. In addition, this metagenomic study is the first study on the colon microbiome associated with CRC mucosa in the Turkish population.

Personalized nutrition (PN) has been proposed as a strategy to increase the effectiveness of dietary recommendations and ultimately improve health status. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to assess whether including omics-based PN in an e-commerce tool improves dietary behavior and metabolic profile in general population. METHODS: A 21-wk parallel, single-blinded, randomized intervention involved 193 adults assigned to a control group following Mediterranean diet recommendations (n = 57, completers = 36), PN (n = 70, completers = 45), or personalized plan (PP, n = 68, completers = 53) integrating a behavioral change program with PN recommendations. The intervention used metabolomics, proteomics, and genetic data to assist participants in creating personalized shopping lists in a simulated e-commerce retailer portal. The primary outcome was the Mediterranean diet adherence screener (MEDAS) score; secondary outcomes included biometric and metabolic markers and dietary habits. RESULTS: Volunteers were categorized with a scoring system based on biomarkers of lipid, carbohydrate metabolism, inflammation, oxidative stress, and microbiota, and dietary recommendations delivered accordingly in the PN and PP groups. The intervention significantly increased MEDAS scores in all volunteers (control-3 points; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 2.2, 3.8; PN-2.7 points; 95% CI: 2.0, 3.3; and PP-2.8 points; 95% CI: 2.1, 3.4; q < 0.001). No significant differences were observed in dietary habits or health parameters between PN and control groups after adjustment for multiple comparisons. Nevertheless, personalized recommendations significantly (false discovery rate < 0.05) and selectively enhanced the scores calculated with biomarkers of carbohydrate metabolism (β: -0.37; 95% CI: -0.56, -0.18), oxidative stress (β: -0.37; 95% CI: -0.60, -0.15), microbiota (β: -0.38; 95% CI: -0.63, -0.15), and inflammation (β: -0.78; 95% CI: -1.24, -0.31) compared with control diet. CONCLUSIONS: Integration of personalized strategies within an e-commerce-like tool did not enhance adherence to Mediterranean diet or improved health markers compared with general recommendations. The metabotyping approach showed promising results and more research is guaranteed to further promote its application in PN. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT04641559 (https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04641559?cond=NCT04641559&rank=1).

The association between soy isoflavones intake and cardiometabolic health remains inconclusive. We investigated the associations of urinary biomarkers of isoflavones including daidzein, glycitein, genistein, equol (a gut microbial metabolite of daidzein), and equol-predicting microbial species with cardiometabolic risk markers. METHODS AND RESULTS: In a 1-year study of 305 Chinese community-dwelling adults aged ≥18 years, urinary isoflavones, fecal microbiota, blood pressure, blood glucose and lipids, and anthropometric data were measured twice, 1 year apart. Brachial-ankle pulse wave velocity was also measured after 1 year. A linear mixed-effects model was used to analyze repeated measurements. Logistic regression was used to calculate the adjusted odds ratio (aOR) and 95% CI for the associations for arterial stiffness. Each 1 μg/g creatinine increase in urinary equol concentrations was associated with 1.47%, 0.96%, and 3.32% decrease in triglycerides, plasma atherogenic index, and metabolic syndrome score, respectively (all P<0.05), and 0.61% increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (P=0.025). Urinary equol was also associated with lower risk of arterial stiffness (aOR, 0.28 [95% CI, 0.09-0.90]; Ptrend=0.036). We identified 21 bacterial genera whose relative abundance was positively associated with urinary equol (false discovery rate-corrected P<0.05) and constructed a microbial species score to reflect the overall equol-predicting capacity. This score (per 1-point increase) was inversely associated with triglycerides (percentage difference=-1.48%), plasma atherogenic index (percentage difference=-0.85%), and the risk of arterial stiffness (aOR, 0.27 [95% CI, 0.08-0.88]; all P<0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that urinary equol and equol-predicting microbial species may improve cardiometabolic risk parameters in Chinese adults.

Therapeutic approaches that target the gut microbiota may be helpful in the potential prevention and treatment of membranous nephropathy (MN). Several studies demonstrated a correlation between gut microbiota and MN. However, the confounding evidence cannot prove a causal relationship between gut microbiota and MN. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The aim of our study is to assess genome-wide association study data for a causal relationship between gut microbiota and MN using a two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) approach. Inverse variance weighted (IVW) was used as the primary technique to determine the association of genetic variants from gut microbiota and MN patients. Besides, sensitivity analyses conﬁrmed the accuracy of the results. Finally, we applied false discovery rate (FDR) correction to results with IVW < 0.05 during multiple hypothesis testing. RESULTS: The results from IVW estimates indicated that Bacillales exhibited a significant association with MN, acting as a risk factor (OR = 1.52, 95% CI: 1.14 - 2.02, p = 0.005). In addition, our univariable MR results showed that 7 bacterial taxa (Melainabacteria, Butyricicoccus, Catenibacterium, Ruminiclostridium5, RuminococcaceaeUCG003, RuminococcaceaeUCG013, and Gastranaerophilales) had suggestive associations with MN. The sensitivity analysis did not reveal any significant heterogeneity in the instrumental variables or horizontal pleiotropy. CONCLUSION: Our findings provided causal evidence for the effect of gut microbiota on MN patients and broadened the spectrum of bacterial taxa that might be involved in the pathogenesis of MN. These selected bacterial taxa hold promise as new biomarkers, which may aid in designing targeted therapeutic modalities for MN, improving our comprehension of the gut-kidney axis.

Fecal metagenomic and serum metabolomic analyses were performed for the discovery of alterations of gut microbiome and metabolites in CRA patients (n = 26), Colorectal cancer (CRC) patients (n = 19), Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) patients (n = 10), and healthy controls (n = 20). Finally, analyzing the associations between gut microbes and metabolites was performed by a Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve. RESULTS: Our analysis present that CRA patients differ significantly in gut microflora and serum metabolites compared with healthy controls, especially for Lachnospiraceae and Parasutterella. Its main metabolite, butyric acid, concentrations were raised in CRA patients compared with the healthy controls, indicating its role as a promoter of colorectal tumorigenesis. α-Linolenic acid and lysophosphatidylcholine represented the other healthy metabolite for CRA. Combining five microbial and five metabolite biomarkers, we differentiated CRA from CRC with an Area Under the Curve (AUC) of 0.85 out of this performance vastly superior to the specificity recorded by traditional markers CEA and CA199 in such differentiation of these conditions. CONCLUSIONS: The study underlines significant microbial and metabolic alterations in CRA with a novel insight into screening and early intervention of its tumorigenesis.

The study examines the association between serum 25(OH)D levels and the gut mycobiota in the Westlake Precision Birth Cohort, which includes pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM). The study develops a genetic risk score (GRS) for 25(OH)D to validate the observational results. In both the prospective and cross-sectional analyses, the vitamin D is associated with gut mycobiota diversity. Specifically, the abundance of Saccharomyces is significantly lower in the vitamin D-sufficient group than in the vitamin D-deficient group. The GRS of 25(OH)D is inversely associated with the abundance of Saccharomyces. Moreover, the Saccharomyces is positively associated with blood glucose levels. CONCLUSION: Blood vitamin D status is associated with the diversity and composition of gut mycobiota in women with GDM, which may provide new insights into the mechanistic understanding of the relationship between vitamin D levels and metabolic health.

This is a post hoc analysis of a subset of postmenopausal individuals enrolled in a randomized trial for treatment of moderate-severe vulvovaginal discomfort that compared vaginal moisturizer, estradiol, or placebo. Vaginal fluid samples from 0, 4, and 12 weeks were characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing (microbiota) and MesoScale Discovery (vaginal fluid immune markers: IL-1b, IL-1a, IL-2, IL-6, IL-18, IL-10, IL-9, IL-13, IL-8, IP10, MIP1a, MIP1b, MIP3a). Global associations between cytokines and microbiota (assessed by relative abundance of individual taxa and Shannon index for alpha, or community, diversity) were explored, adjusting for treatment arm, using linear mixed models, principal component analysis, and Generalized Linear Mixed Model + Microbiome Regression-based Kernel Association Test (GLMM-MiRKAT). RESULTS: A total of 119 individuals with mean age of 61 years were included. At baseline, 29.5% of participants had a Lactobacillus -dominant vaginal microbiota. Across all timepoints, alpha diversity (Shannon index, P = 0.003) was highly associated with immune markers. Individual markers that were associated with Lactobacillus dominance were similar to those observed in premenopausal people: IL-10, IL-1b, IL-6, IL-8 (false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.01), IL-13 (FDR = 0.02), and IL-2 (FDR = 0.09). Over 12 weeks, change in alpha diversity was associated with change in cytokine concentration (Shannon, P = 0.018), with decreased proinflammatory cytokine concentrations observed with decreasing alpha diversity. CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of postmenopausal individuals, Lactobacillus dominance and lower alpha diversity were associated with lower concentrations of inflammatory immune markers, as has been reported in premenopausal people. This suggests that after menopause lactobacilli continue to have beneficial effects on vaginal immune homeostasis, despite lower prevalence.

The role of microbiota in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis (UC) has been increasingly recognized. However, most of the reports are from Western populations. In Middle Eastern countries, including Saudi Arabia, little is known about the role of microbiota. Therefore, our aim was to describe the bacterial microbiota profile and signature in pediatric UC in Saudi Arabia. METHODS: Twenty children with UC and 20 healthy controls enrolled in the study gave stool samples. Twenty rectal mucosal samples were taken from UC and 20 from non-UC controls. Inclusion criteria included newly diagnosed and untreated children and lack of antibiotic exposure for at least 6 months before stool collection was required for children with UC and controls. Bacterial deoxyribonucleic acid was extracted and sequenced using shotgun metagenomic analysis. Statistical analysis included Shannon alpha diversity metrics, Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, DESeq2, and biomarker discovery. RESULTS: The demographic characteristics were similar in children with UC and controls. There was a significant reduction in alpha diversity (P = 0.037) and beta diversity in samples from children with UC (P = 0.001). Many taxa were identified with log2 abundance analysis, revealing 110 and 102 species significantly depleted and enriched in UC, respectively. Eleven bacterial species' signatures were identified. CONCLUSIONS: In Saudi Arabian children with UC, we demonstrate a dysbiosis similar to reports from Western populations, possibly related to changes of lifestyle. Microbial signature discovery in this report is an important contribution to research, leading to the development of adjunctive non-invasive diagnostic options in unusual cases of UC.

Endometrial samples were collected from 225 patients who underwent hysteroscopies, of whom 167 had EPs, whereas 58 had non- hyperproliferative endometrium status. The endometrial microbiota was assessed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. We characterized the endometrial microbiota and identified microbial biomarkers for predicting EPs. RESULTS: The endometrial microbial diversity and composition were significantly different between the EP and control groups. Predictive functional analyses of the endometrial microbiota demonstrated significant alterations in pathways involved in sphingolipid metabolism, steroid hormone biosynthesis, and apoptosis between the two groups. Moreover, a classification model based on endometrial microbial ASV-based biomarkers along with the presence of abnormal uterine bleeding symptoms achieved powerful classification potential in identifying EPs in both the discovery and validation cohorts. CONCLUSION: Our study indicates a potential association between altered endometrial microbiota and EPs. Endometrial microbiota-based biomarkers may prove valuable for the diagnosis of EPs. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry (ChiCTR2100052746).

Diabetes is a predominant driver of coronary artery disease worldwide. This study aims to unravel the distinct characteristics of oral and gut microbiota in diabetic coronary heart disease (DCHD). Simultaneously, we aim to establish a causal link between the diabetes-driven oral-gut microbiota axis and increased susceptibility to diabetic myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injury (MIRI). METHODS: We comprehensively investigated the microbial landscape in the oral and gut microbiota in DCHD using a discovery cohort (n = 183) and a validation chohort (n = 68). Systematically obtained oral (tongue-coating) and fecal specimens were subjected to metagenomic sequencing and qPCR analysis, respectively, to holistically characterize the microbial consortia. Next, we induced diabetic MIRI by administering streptozotocin to C57BL/6 mice and subsequently investigated the potential mechanisms of the oral-gut microbiota axis through antibiotic pre-treatment followed by gavage with specific bacterial strains (Fusobacterium nucleatum or fecal microbiota from DCHD patients) to C57BL/6 mice. RESULTS: Specific microbial signatures such as oral Fusobacterium nucleatum and gut Lactobacillus, Eubacterium, and Roseburia faecis, were identified as potential microbial biomarkers in DCHD. We further validated that oral Fusobacterium nucleatum and gut Lactobacillus are increased in DCHD patients, with a positive correlation between the two. Experimental evidence revealed that in hyperglycemic mice, augmented Fusobacterium nucleatum levels in the oral cavity were accompanied by an imbalance in the oral-gut axis, characterized by an increased coexistence of Fusobacterium nucleatum and Lactobacillus, along with elevated cardiac miRNA-21 and a greater extent of myocardial damage indicated by TTC, HE, TUNEL staining, all of which contributed to exacerbated MIRI. CONCLUSION: Our findings not only uncover dysregulation of the oral-gut microbiota axis in diabetes patients but also highlight the pivotal intermediary role of the increased abundance of oral F. nucleatum and gut Lactobacillus in exacerbating MIRI. Targeting the oral-gut microbiota axis emerges as a potent strategy for preventing and treating DCHD. Oral-gut microbial transmission constitutes an intermediate mechanism by which diabetes influences myocardial injury, offering new insights into preventing acute events in diabetic patients with coronary heart disease.

Thirty-six C57BL/6 male mice are randomly assigned to either a normal chow diet containing 1.9% w/w lard or an HFD containing 20.68% w/w lard or 20.68% w/w sea buckthorn pulp oil for 16 weeks. The study finds that POA significantly attenuated hyperlipidemia, insulin resistance, and inflammation in HFD-fed mice. POA supplementation significantly alters the composition of serum metabolites, particularly lipid metabolites in the glycerophospholipid metabolism pathway. POA obviously increases the abundance of Bifidobacterium and decreases the abundance of Allobaculum. Importantly, the study finds that glycerophosphocholine mediates the effect of Bifidobacterium on LDL-C, sphingomyelin mediates the effect of Bifidobacterium on IL-6, and maslinic acid mediates the effect of Allobaculum on IL-6. CONCLUSION: The results suggest that exogenous POA can improve metabolic disorders and inflammation in HFD-fed mice, potentially by modulating the serum metabolome and gut microbiome.

Ticks serve as vectors for a diverse array of pathogens, including viruses responsible for both human and livestock diseases. Symbiotic bacteria hold significant potential for controlling tick-borne disease. However, the alteration of tick gut bacterial community in response to pathogen infection has not been analyzed for any tick-borne viruses. Here, the impact of severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV) infection on bacterial diversity in the gut of Haemaphysalis longicornis is investigated. METHODS: Unfed tick females were artificially infected with SFTSV. The gut samples were collected and the genomic DNA was extracted. We then investigated alterations in gut bacterial composition in response to SFTSV infection through 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: The study found that a reduction in the number of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) in the tick gut following SFTSV infection. However, there were no significant changes in alpha diversity indices upon infection. Four genera, including Corynebacterium, Arthrobacter, Sphingomonas, and Escherichia, were identified as biomarkers for the tick gut without SFTSV infection. Notably, the predicted correlation network indicated that the biomarkers Sphingomonas and Escherichia exhibited positive correlations within the same subcommunity, which was altered upon viral infection. CONCLUSIONS: These findings revealed that the change in tick gut bacterial composition upon SFTSV infection and could facilitate the discovery new target for tick-borne viral disease control.

Vaginal samples were collected from 31 pregnant Hampshire and Hampshire X Suffolk crossbred ewes on a weekly basis from pre-breeding to pregnancy testing and then biweekly until just after lambing. To characterize the vaginal microbial communities, DNA was extracted and 16S rRNA gene Illumina MiSeq amplicon sequencing was performed. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Alpha diversity metrics indicated an increase in species richness, evenness, and overall diversity throughout gestation. Distinct shifts in the bacterial communities were observed during gestation and were segregated into three periods: early gestation, a transitional period and mid/late gestation. During early gestation, Actinobacillus, Histophilus, and unclassified Leptotrichiaceae were found in greater relative abundance. During the transitional period, a population shift occurred characterized by increasing relative abundance of Streptococcus and Staphylococcus. During mid/late gestation, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Ureaplasma had the greatest relative abundance. These shifts in the microbial population throughout the ewe's gestation are likely related to hormonal changes triggered by the growing conceptus, specifically increasing blood concentration of progesterone. The transitional period shift in vaginal microbial communities potentially aligns with the placental take-over of progesterone production from the corpus luteum at approximately day 50 after conception (gestational week 7). Understanding the observed variability of the vaginal microbiota throughout pregnancy will allow for future comparison of ewes that did not become pregnant or had abnormal pregnancies, which could lead to the discovery of potential bacterial biomarkers for pregnancy outcome; this understanding could also lead to development of probiotics to improve sheep reproductive success.

The relationship between periodontitis and Alzheimer's disease (AD) has attracted more attention recently, whereas profiles of subgingival microbiomes and gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) metabolic signatures in AD patients have rarely been characterized; thus, little evidence exists to support the oral-brain axis hypothesis. Therefore, our study aimed to characterize both the microbial community of subgingival plaque and the metabolomic profiles of GCF in patients with AD and amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) for the first time. METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study. Clinical examinations were performed on all participants. The microbial community of subgingival plaque and the metabolomic profiles of GCF were characterized using the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene high-throughput sequencing and liquid chromatography linked to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, respectively. RESULTS: Thirty-two patients with AD, 32 patients with aMCI, and 32 cognitively normal people were enrolled. The severity of periodontitis was significantly increased in AD patients compared with aMCI patients and cognitively normal people. The 16S rRNA gene sequencing results showed that the relative abundances of 16 species in subgingival plaque were significantly correlated with cognitive function, and LC-MS/MS analysis identified a total of 165 differentially abundant metabolites in GCF. Moreover, multiomics Data Integration Analysis for Biomarker discovery using Latent cOmponents (DIABLO) analysis revealed that 19 differentially abundant metabolites were significantly correlated with Veillonella parvula, Dialister pneumosintes, Leptotrichia buccalis, Pseudoleptotrichia goodfellowii, and Actinomyces massiliensis, in which galactinol, sn-glycerol 3-phosphoethanolamine, D-mannitol, 1 h-indole-1-pentanoic acid, 3-(1-naphthalenylcarbonyl)- and L-iditol yielded satisfactory accuracy for the predictive diagnosis of AD progression. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first combined subgingival microbiome and GCF metabolome study in patients with AD and aMCI, which revealed that periodontal microbial dysbiosis and metabolic disorders may be involved in the etiology and progression of AD, and the differential abundance of the microbiota and metabolites may be useful as potential markers for AD in the future.

Using proximity extension assays, 1,342 plasma proteins were measured in 1,827 individuals from the Impaired Glucose Tolerance and Microbiota (IGTM) study and 883 individuals from the Swedish Cardiopulmonary BioImage Study (SCAPIS) aged 50-64 years without history of ischaemic heart disease and with CAC assessed by computed tomography. After data-driven feature selection, extreme gradient boosting machine learning models were trained on the IGTM cohort to predict the presence of CAC using combinations of proteins and traditional risk factors. The trained models were validated in SCAPIS. RESULTS: The best plasma protein subset (44 proteins) predicted CAC with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.691 in the validation cohort. However, this was not better than prediction by traditional risk factors alone (AUC = 0.710, P = .17). Adding proteins to traditional risk factors did not improve the predictions (AUC = 0.705, P = .6). Most of these 44 proteins were highly correlated with traditional risk factors. CONCLUSIONS: A plasma protein subset that could predict the presence of subclinical CAC was identified but it did not outperform nor improve a model based on traditional risk factors. Thus, support for this targeted proteomics platform to predict subclinical CAC beyond traditional risk factors was not found.

The coexistence of coronary artery disease (CAD) and cognitive impairment has become a common clinical phenomenon. However, there is currently limited research on the etiology of this disease cluster, discovery of biomarkers, and identification of precise intervention targets. METHODS: We explored the causal connections between gut microbiota, blood metabolites, and the disease cluster of CAD combined with cognitive impairment through two-sample Mendelian randomization (TSMR). Additionally, we determine the gut microbiota and blood metabolites with the strongest causal associations using Bayesian model averaging multivariate Mendelian randomization (MR-BMA) analysis. Furthermore, we will investigate the mediating role of blood metabolites through a two-step Mendelian randomization design. RESULTS: We identified gut microbiota that had significant causal associations with cognitive impairment. Additionally, we also discovered blood metabolites that exhibited significant causal associations with both CAD and cognitive impairment. According to the MR-BMA results, the free cholesterol to total lipids ratio in large very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) was identified as the key blood metabolite significantly associated with CAD. Similarly, the cholesteryl esters to total lipids ratio in small VLDL emerged as the primary blood metabolite with a significant causal association with dementia with lewy bodies (DLB). For the two-step Mendelian randomization analysis, we identified blood metabolites that could potentially mediate the association between genus Butyricicoccus and CAD in the potential causal links. CONCLUSION: Our study utilized Mendelian randomization (MR) to identify the gut microbiota features and blood metabolites characteristics associated with the disease cluster of CAD combined with cognitive impairment. These findings will provide a meaningful reference for the identification of biomarkers for the disease cluster of CAD combined with cognitive impairment as well as the discovery of targets for intervention to address the problems in the clinic.

Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is a common clinical manifestation of a perturbed vaginal ecology associated with adverse sexual and reproductive health outcomes if left untreated. The existing diagnostic modalities are either cumbersome or require skilled expertise, warranting alternate tests. Application of machine-learning tools to heterogeneous and high-dimensional multi-omics datasets finds promising potential in data integration and may aid biomarker discovery. OBJECTIVES: The present study aimed to evaluate the potential of the microbiome and metabolome-derived biomarkers in BV diagnosis. Interpretable machine-learning algorithms were used to evaluate the utility of an integrated-omics-derived classification model. METHODS: Vaginal samples obtained from reproductive-age group women with (n = 40) and without BV (n = 40) were subjected to 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and LC-MS-based metabolomics. The vaginal microbiome and metabolome were characterized, and machine-learning analysis was performed to build a classification model using biomarkers with the highest diagnostic accuracy. RESULTS: Microbiome-based diagnostic model exhibited a ROC-AUC (10-fold CV) of 0.84 ± 0.21 and accuracy of 0.79 ± 0.18, and important features were Aerococcus spp., Mycoplasma hominis, Sneathia spp., Lactobacillus spp., Prevotella spp., Gardnerella spp. and Fannyhessea vaginae. The metabolome-derived model displayed superior performance with a ROC-AUC of 0.97 ± 0.07 and an accuracy of 0.92 ± 0.08. Beta-leucine, methylimidazole acetaldehyde, dimethylethanolamine, L-arginine and beta cortol were among key predictive metabolites for BV. A predictive model combining both microbial and metabolite features exhibited a high ROC-AUC of 0.97 ± 0.07 and accuracy of 0.94 ± 0.08 with diagnostic performance only slightly superior to the metabolite-based model. CONCLUSION: Application of machine-learning tools to multi-omics datasets aid biomarker discovery with high predictive performance. Metabolome-derived classification models were observed to have superior diagnostic performance in predicting BV than microbiome-based biomarkers.

Recently, intestinal bacteria have attracted attention as factors affecting the prognosis of patients with cancer. However, the intestinal microbiome is composed of several hundred types of bacteria, necessitating the development of an analytical method that can allow the use of this information as a highly accurate biomarker. In this study, we investigated whether the preoperative intestinal bacterial profile in patients with esophageal cancer who underwent surgery after preoperative chemotherapy could be used as a biomarker of postoperative recurrence of esophageal cancer. METHODS: We determined the gut microbiome of the patients using 16S rRNA metagenome sequencing, followed by statistical analysis. Simultaneously, we performed a machine learning analysis using a random forest model with hyperparameter tuning and compared the data obtained. RESULTS: Statistical and machine learning analyses revealed two common bacterial genera, Butyricimonas and Actinomyces, which were abundant in cases with recurrent esophageal cancer. Butyricimonas primarily produces butyrate, whereas Actinomyces are oral bacteria whose function in the gut is unknown. CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that Butyricimonas spp. may be a biomarker of postoperative recurrence of esophageal cancer. Although the extent of the involvement of these bacteria in immune regulation remains unknown, future research should investigate their presence in other pathological conditions. Such research could potentially lead to a better understanding of the immunological impact of these bacteria on patients with cancer and their application as biomarkers.

In recent years, human microbiome studies have received increasing attention as this field is considered a potential source for clinical applications. With the advancements in omics technologies and AI, research focused on the discovery for potential biomarkers in the human microbiome using machine learning tools has produced positive outcomes. Despite the promising results, several issues can still be found in these studies such as datasets with small number of samples, inconsistent results, lack of uniform processing and methodologies, and other additional factors lead to lack of reproducibility in biomedical research. In this work, we propose a methodology that combines the DADA2 pipeline for 16s rRNA sequences processing and the Recursive Ensemble Feature Selection (REFS) in multiple datasets to increase reproducibility and obtain robust and reliable results in biomedical research. RESULTS: Three experiments were performed analyzing microbiome data from patients/cases in Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD), Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), and Type 2 Diabetes (T2D). In each experiment, we found a biomarker signature in one dataset and applied to 2 other as further validation. The effectiveness of the proposed methodology was compared with other feature selection methods such as K-Best with F-score and random selection as a base line. The Area Under the Curve (AUC) was employed as a measure of diagnostic accuracy and used as a metric for comparing the results of the proposed methodology with other feature selection methods. Additionally, we use the Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) as a metric to evaluate the performance of the methodology as well as for comparison with other feature selection methods. CONCLUSIONS: We developed a methodology for reproducible biomarker discovery for 16s rRNA microbiome sequence analysis, addressing the issues related with data dimensionality, inconsistent results and validation across independent datasets. The findings from the three experiments, across 9 different datasets, show that the proposed methodology achieved higher accuracy compared to other feature selection methods. This methodology is a first approach to increase reproducibility, to provide robust and reliable results.

IgE-mediated cow's milk allergy (IgE-CMA) is one of the first allergies to arise in early childhood and may result from exposure to various milk allergens, of which β-lactoglobulin (BLG) and casein are the most important. Understanding the underlying mechanisms behind IgE-CMA is imperative for the discovery of novel biomarkers and the design of innovative treatment and prevention strategies. METHODS: We report a longitudinal in vivo murine model, in which two mice strains (BALB/c and C57Bl/6) were sensitized to BLG using either cholera toxin or an oil emulsion (n = 6 per group). After sensitization, mice were challenged orally, their clinical signs monitored, antibody (IgE and IgG1) and cytokine levels (IL-4 and IFN-γ) measured, and fecal samples subjected to metabolomics. The results of the murine models were further extrapolated to fecal microbiome-metabolome data from our population of IgE-CMA (n = 22) and healthy (n = 23) children (Trial: NCT04249973), on which polar metabolomics, lipidomics and 16S rRNA metasequencing were performed. In vitro gastrointestinal digestions and multi-omics corroborated the microbial origin of proposed metabolic changes. RESULTS: During mice sensitization, we observed multiple microbially derived metabolic alterations, most importantly bile acid, energy and tryptophan metabolites, that preceded allergic inflammation. We confirmed microbial dysbiosis, and its associated effect on metabolic alterations in our patient cohort, through in vitro digestions and multi-omics, which was accompanied by metabolic signatures of low-grade inflammation. CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that gut dysbiosis precedes allergic inflammation and nurtures a chronic low-grade inflammation in children on elimination diets, opening important new opportunities for future prevention and treatment strategies.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a multifactorial neurodevelopmental disorder. Major interplays between the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and the central nervous system (CNS) seem to be driven by gut microbiota (GM). Herein, we provide a GM functional characterization, based on GM metabolomics, mapping of bacterial biochemical pathways, and anamnestic, clinical, and nutritional patient metadata. METHODS: Fecal samples collected from children with ASD and neurotypical children were analyzed by gas-chromatography mass spectrometry coupled with solid phase microextraction (GC-MS/SPME) to determine volatile organic compounds (VOCs) associated with the metataxonomic approach by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Multivariate and univariate statistical analyses assessed differential VOC profiles and relationships with ASD anamnestic and clinical features for biomarker discovery. Multiple web-based and machine learning (ML) models identified metabolic predictors of disease and network analyses correlated GM ecological and metabolic patterns. RESULTS: The GM core volatilome for all ASD patients was characterized by a high concentration of 1-pentanol, 1-butanol, phenyl ethyl alcohol; benzeneacetaldehyde, octadecanal, tetradecanal; methyl isobutyl ketone, 2-hexanone, acetone; acetic, propanoic, 3-methyl-butanoic and 2-methyl-propanoic acids; indole and skatole; and o-cymene. Patients were stratified based on age, GI symptoms, and ASD severity symptoms. Disease risk prediction allowed us to associate butanoic acid with subjects older than 5 years, indole with the absence of GI symptoms and low disease severity, propanoic acid with the ASD risk group, and p-cymene with ASD symptoms, all based on the predictive CBCL-EXT scale. The HistGradientBoostingClassifier model classified ASD patients vs. CTRLs by an accuracy of 89%, based on methyl isobutyl ketone, benzeneacetaldehyde, phenyl ethyl alcohol, ethanol, butanoic acid, octadecane, acetic acid, skatole, and tetradecanal features. LogisticRegression models corroborated methyl isobutyl ketone, benzeneacetaldehyde, phenyl ethyl alcohol, skatole, and acetic acid as ASD predictors. CONCLUSION: Our results will aid the development of advanced clinical decision support systems (CDSSs), assisted by ML models, for advanced ASD-personalized medicine, based on omics data integrated into electronic health/medical records. Furthermore, new ASD screening strategies based on GM-related predictors could be used to improve ASD risk assessment by uncovering novel ASD onset and risk predictors.

Fecal DNA was extracted from 16 fecal samples (eight rabbit models with IDD and eight sex- and age-matched healthy controls) and analyzed by high-throughput 16S rDNA sequencing. The fecal samples were also analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry-based metabolomics. Multivariate analyses were conducted for the relationship between the omics data and IDD, linear discriminant analysis effect size was employed for biomarker discovery. Moreover, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate the differential metabolites. The potential correlation between differential gut microbiota and metabolites was then assessed. RESULTS: The 16S rDNA sequencing results showed that the β-diversity of the gut microbiota was significantly different between the IDD and control groups, with distinct abundance levels of dominant genera. Moreover, 59 metabolites were significantly upregulated and 91 were downregulated in IDD rabbits versus the controls. The KEGG enrichment analysis revealed that the top pathways remarkably impacted by IDD were tyrosine metabolism, amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism, benzoate degradation, ABC transporters, ascorbate and aldarate metabolism, pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis, and pyrimidine metabolism. The correlation analysis revealed that DL-tyrosine and N-acetylmuramic acid were associated with multiple differential bacterial genera, including Helicobacter and Vibrio, which may play important roles in the process of IVD degeneration. CONCLUSION: Our findings revealed that IDD altered gut microbiota and fecal metabolites in a rabbit model. The correlation analysis of microbiota and metabolome provides a deeper understanding of IDD and its possible etiopathogenesis. These results also provide a direction and theoretical basis for the clinical application of fecal transplantation, probiotics, and other methods to regulate gut microbiota in the treatment of LBP caused by IDD.

Microbial infections, particularly those caused by rhinovirus (RV) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), are major triggers for asthma exacerbations. These viruses activate toll-like receptors (TLRs), initiating an innate immune response. To better understand microbial-induced asthma exacerbations, animal models that closely mimic human lung characteristics are essential. This study aimed to assess airway responses in guinea pigs exposed to TLR agonists, simulating microbial infections. METHODS: The agonists poly(I: C) (TLR3), lipopolysaccharide (LPS; TLR4) and imiquimod (TLR7), or the combination of poly(I: C) and imiquimod (P/I) were administered intranasally once a day over four consecutive days. The latter group received daily intraperitoneal injections of dexamethasone starting one day before the TLR agonists challenge. Respiratory functions were measured by whole-body plethysmography and forced oscillatory technique. Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) cells and lungs were collected for analysis. RESULTS: The intranasal exposure of LPS and P/I caused an increase in enhanced pause (Penh) after challenge, whereas neither poly(I: C) nor imiquimod alone showed any effect. After the challenges of LPS, poly(I: C) or P/I, but not imiquimod alone, induced an increase of both Rrs (resistance of the respiratory system) and Ers (elastance of the respiratory system). LPS exposure caused an increase of neutrophils in BALF, whereas none of the other exposures affected the composition of cells in BALF. Exposure to LPS, poly (I: C), imiquimod, and P/I all caused a marked infiltration of inflammatory cells and an increase of mast cells around the small airways. For the expression of inflammatory mediators, LPS increased CXCL8, poly(I: C) and imiquimod decreased IL-4 and IL-5, and increased IFNγ. Imiquimod increased CXCL8 and IL-6, whereas P/I decreased IL-5, and increased IL-6 and IFNγ. The increases in Rrs, Ers, and airway inflammation, but not the altered expression of inflammatory cytokines, were attenuated by dexamethasone. CONCLUSIONS: TLR agonists promote acute airway inflammation and induce airway obstruction and hyperresponsiveness in guinea pigs. The severity of these effects varies depending on the specific agonists used. Notably, dexamethasone reversed pulmonary functional changes and mitigated bronchial inflammation caused by the combined treatment of P/I. However, it had no impact on the expression of inflammatory mediators.

the widespread use of antibiotics in human and veterinary medicine has contributed to the global challenge of antimicrobial resistance, posing significant environmental and public health risks. OBJECTIVES: this study aimed to examine the microbiome and resistome dynamics across a salinity gradient, analyzing water and sediment samples from the Baltic Sea coast and the Curonian Lagoon between 2017 and 2023. METHODS: the composition of the water and sediment bacterial community was determined by Full-Length Amplicon Metagenomics Sequencing, while ARG detection and quantification were performed using the SmartChipTM Real-Time PCR system. RESULTS: the observed differences in bacterial community composition between the Baltic Sea coast and the Curonian Lagoon were driven by variations in salinity and chlorophyll a (chl a) concentration. The genera associated with infectious potential were observed in higher abundances in sediment than in water samples. Over 300 genes encoding antibiotic resistance (ARGs), such as aminoglycosides, beta-lactams, and multidrug resistance genes, were identified. Of particular interest were those ARGs that have previously been detected in pathogens and those currently classified as a potential future threat. Furthermore, our findings reveal a higher abundance and a distinct profile of ARGs in sediment samples from the lagoon compared to water. CONCLUSIONS: these results suggest that transitional waters such as lagoons may serve as reservoirs for ARGs, and might be influenced by anthropogenic pressures and natural processes such as salinity fluctuation and nutrient cycling.

The extensive use of antibiotics in the global livestock industry in recent decades has accelerated the accumulation and dissemination of antibiotic-resistance genes (ARGs) within terrestrial ecosystems. This occurs due to the limited absorption of most antibiotics, leading to their release into the environment through feces and urine. This poses a significant threat to both the environment and human health. However, the response of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms and their ARGs in grasslands to prolonged grazing, as well as the primary microbial taxa driving the ARG distribution, remain poorly understood, especially within various microhabitats. In this study, we characterized ARGs in the phyllosphere, litter, and soil after decades of livestock grazing in a meadow steppe. We particularly focused on identifying the major members of the microbial community influencing ARGs and the distinction between microbial generalists and specialists. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that a core set of ARGs accounted for 90% of the abundance in this plant-soil ecosystem. While the soil exhibited the highest ARG abundance, the phyllosphere, and litter displayed higher ARG diversity and diverse distribution patterns after overgrazing. Grazing increased ARG abundance by elevating the proportion of core ARGs and suppressing stochastic ARGs in the phyllosphere and litter, while it had little effect on the ARGs in the soil. Additionally, microbial generalist abundance increased, but specialist abundance decreased in the phyllosphere and litter, with no effect in the soil, under grazed conditions. Ultimately, microbial microhabitats and grazing influenced ARG community characteristics through direct (i.e., feces and other exogenous ARG input) and indirect (i.e., trampling and selective feeding) effects on nutrient availability, microbial community composition, and mobile genetic elements. The generalist community, with its broad ecological niches and phylogenetic composition, made the most significant contribution to the ARG characteristics. CONCLUSIONS: This study underscores the impact of environmental disturbances on the distributional patterns of ARGs in ecosystems, mediated by the regulation of microbial generalized species. These insights enhance our understanding of microbial control over ARGs and facilitate predictions regarding the dynamics and risk of ARGs in diverse ecological niches subjected to anthropogenic disturbances. Video Abstract.

The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome. METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA gene markers. RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the Eukaryotic community. CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

In total, 341 isolates were collected from 265 patients including clinical information. Antifungal susceptibility testing against common antifungals was performed in addition to sequencing of ERG11 and FKS1. Last, isolates were genotyped with short tandem repeat (STR) genotyping to investigate potential nosocomial transmission. RESULTS: The FLCR rate was 26.7% (91/341), out of which 75.8% (69/91) harboured the ERG11Y132F mutation. Patients infected with FLCR isolates had a higher mortality rate compared to their susceptible counterparts (49% for FLCR vs. 42% for susceptible). ECR rate was 2.1% (7/341) and isolates carried FKS1F652L/R658G/W1370R mutations. Concerningly, four ECR isolates were MDR. FLCR isolates grouped in distinct clusters without evidence of inter-hospital transmission, whereas large clusters containing susceptible isolates from all centres were noted. CONCLUSION: Overall, the increasing prevalence of FLCR C. parapsilosis at national level and the emergence of ECR and MDR isolates pose serious clinical challenges in Türkiye. Therefore, conducting large-scale epidemiological studies are critical to determine the trend of antifungal resistance and to tailor pertinent antifungal stewardship and infection control strategies to effectively curb the spread of drug-resistant C. parapsilosis.

The biological larvicide Bacillus thuringiensis subsp. israelensis (Bti) represents a safe and effective alternative to chemical insecticides for mosquito control. Efficient control of mosquitoes implicates continuous and extensive application of Bti. This massive use of Bti imposes strong selective pressure, but the complex mode of action of the numerous synergistic Bti endotoxins lower the risk of the emergence of resistance. Although resistance to Bti has not been identified at the population level in nature, some larvae can survive Bti exposure, suggesting tolerance mechanisms. Here we investigated whether Bti-tolerant Aedes albopictus larvae experience any fitness costs. We also studied how this tolerance affects different aspects of the phenotype of the emerging adults that could be relevant for arboviral transmission. METHODS: We exposed Ae. albopictus larvae to lethal concentration of Bti and studied the fitness and gut microbiota of tolerant larvae and their adult counterparts. We further compared the transcript abundance of nine key immunity genes in the gut of Bti-tolerant larvae and their emerging adults versus those not exposed to Bti. RESULTS: Our results showed that Bti exposure has multifaceted impacts on Ae. albopictus mosquitoes during both larval and adult stages. The carry-over effect of Bti exposure on tolerant larvae manifested in reduced adult emergence rate, shorter lifespan, and decreased fecundity. Bti also alters the gut microbiota of both larvae and adults. We observed higher microbial diversity in Bti-tolerant larvae and changes in the richness of core microbiota. Bti infection and the altered microbiota triggered immune responses in the larval and adult guts. CONCLUSIONS: The observed reduction in mosquito fitness and changes in the composition of the microbiota of adults emerging from tolerant larvae could negatively influence mosquito vectorial capacity. Understanding these impacts is crucial for evaluating the broader implications of Bti-based insecticides in mosquito control programs.

Studies have shown that changes in the frequency of oral microorganisms may play a key role in the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, no research has been conducted on the oral fungal composition in AD-patients. The present study aimed to investigate the changes in the frequency of oral fungal composition, the antifungal susceptibility, and the enzymatic profiles of oral fungal composition in patients suffering from AD compared to non-AD individuals. MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the present analytical cross-sectional study during 12 months, 76 hospitalized patients with AD were matched with 76 individuals without AD. A sterile serum physiology-moistened cotton-tipped swab was used to sample the mouth area. All swabs were cultured on Sabouraud Chloramphenicol Agar. Fungal identified were confirmed through the PCR-sequencing techniques. Enzyme activity index (EAI) for important pathogenic factors including proteinase, esterase and hemolysin was measured using relevant protocols. The susceptibility to 8 antifungal agents (nystatin, voriconazole, itraconazole, fluconazole, posaconazole, amphotericin B, 5-fluorocytosine, and caspofungin) against fungal strains obtained from AD-patients was evaluated according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines, document M38-A2 for filamentous fungi, and document M27-A4 for yeasts. RESULTS: The results showed that compared to the non-AD individuals, the prevalence of oral fungal composition in AD group was 1.6 times higher. Candida albicans was the most common fungal species isolated from oral swab samples of AD group (n=53, 80%) and non-AD group (n=28, 40%), and the diversity of the oral fungal composition in AD-patients were lower than non-AD individuals. Among the 3 investigated virulence factors, a statistically significant difference was shown in terms of hemolysin activity level between the two studied groups (p<0.05) and the activity level of esterase and proteinase enzymes did not show a significant difference in the two studied groups (p>0.05). The results showed that almost all of the tested isolates were susceptible to nystatin, the most widely prescribed antifungal to treat superficial infections, and only 1.69 % (2/118) of the Candida isolates were resistant to this antifungal drug. CONCLUSION: Understanding the changes in the frequency of oral fungal composition the antifungal susceptibility, and the enzymatic profiles of oral fungal composition in patients suffering from AD compared to non-AD individuals makes it possible to better understand the etiology of this disease.

The rumen microbiome plays an essential role in maintaining ruminants' growth and performance even under extreme environmental conditions, however, which factors influence rumen microbiome stability when ruminants are reared in such habitats throughout the year is unclear. Hence, the rumen microbiome of yak (less domesticated) and cattle (domesticated) reared on the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau through the year were assessed to evaluate temporal changes in their composition, function, and stability. RESULTS: Rumen fermentation characteristics and pH significantly shifted across seasons in both cattle and yak, but the patterns differed between the two ruminant species. Ruminal enzyme activity varied with season, and production of xylanase and cellulase was greater in yak compared to cattle in both fall and winter. The rumen bacterial community varied with season in both yak and cattle, with higher alpha diversity and similarity (beta diversity) in yak than cattle. The diversity indices of eukaryotic community did not change with season in both ruminant species, but higher similarity was observed in yak. In addition, the similarity of rumen microbiome functional community was higher in yak than cattle across seasons. Moreover, yak rumen microbiome encoded more genes (GH2 and GH3) related to cellulose and hemicellulose degradation compared to cattle, and a new enzyme family (GH160) gene involved in oligosaccharides was uniquely detected in yak rumen. The season affected microbiome attenuation and buffering values (stability), with higher buffering value in yak rumen microbiome than cattle. Positive correlations between antimicrobial resistance gene (dfrF) and CAZyme family (GH113) and microbiome stability were identified in yak, but such relationship was negatively correlated in cattle. CONCLUSIONS: The findings of the potential of cellulose degradation, the relationship between rumen microbial stability and the abundance of functional genes varied differently across seasons and between yak and cattle provide insight into the mechanisms that may underpin their divergent adaptation patterns to the harsh climate of the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. These results lay a solid foundation for developing strategies to maintain and improve rumen microbiome stability and dig out the potential candidates for manufacturing lignocellulolytic enzymes in the yak rumen to enhance ruminants' performance under extreme environmental conditions.

Milk is an excellent growth medium for microorganisms due to its nutritive composition. Microorganisms have been implicated in bovine mastitis (BM) in dairy cows as well as causing infections in animals and humans. Despite extensive endeavours to manage BM, this condition continues to persist as the most prevalent and economically burdensome problem affecting dairy cattle on a global scale. Non-aureus staphylococci (NAS) species such as Staphylococcus haemolyticus, S. epidermidis, and S. xylosus are currently the predominant microbiological agents identified as the main cause of subclinical udder infections and are also considered opportunistic pathogens in cases of clinical mastitis in dairy cows. Therefore, it is crucial to elucidate the genetic profile of these species. The primary objective of this study was to characterise three phenotypically determined multidrug-resistant NAS environmental strains (NWU MKU1, NWU MKU2, and NWU MKS3) obtained from dairy cows milk via whole-genome sequencing. RESULTS: The results confirmed that the three isolates were S. haemolyticus with genome sizes of 2.44, 2.56, and 2.56 Mb and a G + C content of 32.8%. The genomes contained an array of antibiotic resistance genes that may potentially confer resistance to a range of antibiotic classes, such as macrolides, fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, cephalosporins, tetracyclines, peptides, and phenicol. Furthermore, all the genomes carried virulence genes, which are responsible for several functions, such as adhesion, enzyme and toxin production. The genomes of these organisms contained signatures encoding mobile genetic elements such as prophages and insertion sequences. CONCLUSION: These findings indicate there is a need for diligent monitoring with improved management practices and quality control strategies on farms to safeguard milk production systems and human health.

Commensal bacteria in the intestine release enzymes to degrade and ferment dietary components, producing beneficial metabolites. However, the regulatory effects of microbial-derived enzymes on the intestinal microbiota composition and the influence on host health remain elusive. Xylanase can degrade xylan into oligosaccharides, showing wide application in feed industry. RESULTS: To validate the immune-protective effects of xylanase, Nile tilapia was used as the model and fed with xylanase. The results showed that dietary xylanase improved the survival rate of Nile tilapia when they were challenged with Aeromonas hydrophila. The transcriptome analysis showed significant enrichment of genes related to interleukin-17d (il-17d) signaling pathway in the xylanase treatment group. High-throughput sequencing revealed that dietary xylanase altered the composition of the intestinal microbiota and directly promoted the proliferation of Allobaculum stercoricanis which could produce butyrate in vitro. Consequently, dietary xylanase supplementation increased the butyrate level in fish gut. Further experiment verified that butyrate supplementation enhanced the expression of il-17d and regenerating islet-derived 3 gamma (reg3g) in the gut. The knockdown experiment of il-17d confirmed that il-17d is necessary for butyrate to protect Nile tilapia from pathogen resistance. Flow cytometry analysis indicated that butyrate increased the abundance of IL-17D+ intestinal epithelial cells in fish. Mechanistically, butyrate functions as an HDAC3 inhibitor, enhancing il-17d expression and playing a crucial role in pathogen resistance. CONCLUSION: Dietary xylanase significantly altered the composition of intestinal microbiota and increased the content of butyrate in the intestine. Butyrate activated the transcription of il-17d in intestinal epithelial cells by inhibiting histone deacetylase 3, thereby protecting the Nile tilapia from pathogen infection. This study elucidated how microbial-derived xylanase regulates host immune function, providing a theoretical basis for the development and application of functional enzymes. Video Abstract.

Alterations in upper respiratory microbiomes have been implicated in shaping host health trajectories, including by limiting mucosal pathogen colonization. However, limited comparative studies of respiratory microbiome development and functioning across age groups have been performed. Herein, we perform shotgun metagenomic sequencing paired with pathogen inhibition assays to elucidate differences in nasal and oral microbiome composition and intermicrobial interactions across healthy 24-month-old infant (n = 229) and adult (n = 100) populations. RESULTS: We find that beta diversity of nasal and oral microbiomes varies with age, with nasal microbiomes showing greater population-level variation compared to oral microbiomes. Infant microbiome alpha diversity was significantly lower across nasal samples and higher in oral samples, relative to adults. Accordingly, we demonstrate significant differences in genus- and species-level composition of microbiomes between sites and age groups. Antimicrobial resistome patterns likewise varied across body sites, with oral microbiomes showing higher resistance gene abundance compared to nasal microbiomes. Biosynthetic gene clusters encoding specialized metabolite production were found in higher abundance across infant oral microbiomes, relative to adults. Investigation of pathogen inhibition revealed greater inhibition of gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria by oral commensals, while nasal isolates had higher antifungal activity. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we identify significant differences in the microbial communities inhabiting nasal and oral cavities of healthy infants relative to adults. These findings inform our understanding of the interactions impacting respiratory microbiome composition and functions related to colonization resistance, with important implications for host health across the lifespan. Video Abstract.

The world society is still suffering greatly from waterborne infections, with developing countries bearing most of the morbidity and death burden, especially concerning young children. Moreover, microbial resistance is one of the most prevalent global problems that extends the need for self-medication and the healing period, or it may be linked to treatment failure that results in further hospitalization, higher healthcare expenses, and higher mortality rates. Thus, innovative synthesis of new antimicrobial materials is required to preserve the environment and enhance human health. RESULTS: The present study highlighted a simple and cost-effective approach to biosynthesize a chitosan/graphene oxide/zinc oxide nanocomposite (CS/GO/ZnO) alone and immobilized in a macroporous cryogel as a new antimicrobial agent. Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633 was used as a safe and efficient bio-nano-factory during biosynthesis. The formation of CS/GO/ZnO was confirmed and characterized using different analyses including ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), selective area diffraction pattern (SADP), Zeta analyses, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). GO combined with ZnO NPs successfully and displayed an adsorption peak at 358 nm. The XRD results showed the crystalline composition of the loaded ZnO NPs on GO sheets. FTIR spectrum confirmed the presence of proteins during the synthesis which act as stabilizing and capping agents. The nanocomposite has a high negative surface charge (-32.8 ± 5.7 mV) which increases its stability. SEM and TEM showing the size of biosynthesized ZnO-NPs was in the range of 40-50 nm. The CS/GO/ZnO alone or immobilized in cryogel revealed good antimicrobial activities against B. cereus ATCC 14,579, Escherichia coli ATCC 25,922, and Candida albicans ATCC 10,231 in a dose-dependent manner. The CS/GO/ZnO cryogel revealed higher antimicrobial activity than GO/ZnO nanocomposite and standard antibiotics (amoxicillin and miconazole) with inhibition zones averages of 24.33 ± 0.12, 15.67 ± 0.03, and 17.5 ± 0.49 mm, respectively. The MIC values of the prepared nanocomposite against B. cereus, E. coli, and C. albicans were 80, 80, and 90 µg/ml compared to standard drugs (90, 120 and 150 µg/ml, respectively). According to the TEM ultrastructure studies of nanocomposite-treated microbes, treated cells had severe deformities and morphological alterations compared to the untreated cells including cell wall distortion, the separation between the cell wall and plasma membrane, vacuoles formation moreover complete cell lyses were also noted. In the cytotoxicity test of CS/GO/ZnO alone and its cryogel, there was a significant reduction (p˂0.05) in cell viability of WI-38 normal lung cell line after the concentration of 209 and 164 µg/ml, respectively. It showed the low toxic effect of the nanocomposite and its cryogel on the WI-38 line which implies its safety. In addition, water treatment with the CS/GO/ZnO cryogel decreased turbidity (0.58 NTU), total coliform (2 CFU/100 ml), fecal coliform (1 CFU/100 ml), fecal Streptococcus (2 CFU/100 ml), and heterotrophic plate counts (53 CFU/1 ml) not only in comparison with the chlorine-treated samples (1.69 NTU, 4 CFU/100 ml, 6 CFU/100 ml, 57 CFU/100 ml, and 140 CFU/1 ml, respectively) but also with the raw water samples (6.9 NTU, 10800 CFU/100 ml, 660 CFU/100 ml, 800 CFU/100 ml, and 4400 CFU/1 ml, respectively). Moreover, cryogel significantly decreased the concentration of different heavy metals, especially cobalt compared to chlorine (0.004 ppm, 0.002 ppm, and 0.001 ppm for raw water, chlorine-treated, and cryogel-treated groups, respectively) which helped in the reduction of their toxic effects. CONCLUSION: This study provides an effective, promising, safe, and alternative nanocomposite to treat different human and animal pathogenic microbes that might be used in different environmental, industrial, and medical applications.

Considering that antimicrobial resistance among oral pathogens is a significant concern in dental practice, with broader implications for overall health due to the oral microbiota serving as a reservoir for antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), research into natural products is crucial for addressing this issue. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate tea tree oil (TTO) and chitosan (CH) performance against oral pathogens, including mixed-species biofilm, and its effects on bacteria growth, in addition to chemical characterization and cytotoxicity of TTO. METHODS: Tea Tree Oil and low molecular weight chitosan were used in this study. The chemical composition of TTO was analyzed using gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC-MS). To evaluate TTO's antimicrobial properties, time-kill and cell viability assays were conducted. Additionally, minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC), minimum microbiocidal concentration (MMC), checkerboard, and biofilm assays were performed using TTO and CH alone and in combination. RESULTS: TTO chromatography peaks found consistent with the standard ISO4730:2017 and literature. TTO and CH exhibited inhibitory activity against all tested microorganisms. The predominantly microbiostatic activity of TTO is probably related to terpinen-4-ol associated with terpinene. The oil at MIC value was able to delay the log phase of Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans growth. Fibroblasts (L929) viability remained above 70 % during 24 h for TTO concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 0.0625 mg/ml. TTO-CH combination showed a synergistic activity (FIC = 0.5) against A. actinomycetemcomitans and Streptococcus sanguinis, at a concentration of 0,25MIC for both species. The compounds at MIC concentration inhibited both monospecies and mixed-species biofilms studied bacteria to the same extent as the azithromycin control. CONCLUSION: TTO and CH demonstrated efficacy in combating oral pathogens and TTO-CH combination offers a promising approach to confront microbial resistance in the oral environment.

Multidrug- or rifampicin-resistant tuberculosis (TB; MDR/RR-TB) is a significant public health threat. However, the mechanisms involved in its transmission in Sichuan, China are unclear. To provide a scientific basis for MDR/RR-TB control and prevention, we investigated the drug-resistance characteristics, genetic diversity, and transmission dynamics and analyzed the demographic and clinical characteristics of patients to identify risk factors for the acquisition of MDR/RR-TB in Sichuan, Western China. METHODS: Whole-genome sequencing was performed using a sample comprised of all MDR/RR-TB strains isolated from patients with pulmonary TB (≥ 15 years) at the 22 surveillance sites in Sichuan province between January 2019 and December 2021, to analyze genotypic drug resistance and genetic diversity. Moreover, we performed statistical analyses of the epidemiological characteristics and risk factors associated with the transmission dynamics of MDR/RR-TB. RESULTS: The final analysis included 278 MDR/RR TB strains. Lineage 2.2, the major sub-lineage, accounted for 82.01% (228/278) of isolates, followed by lineage 4.5 (9.72%, 27/278), lineage 4.4 (6.83%, 19/278), and lineage 4.2 (1.44%, 4/278). The drug resistance rates, ranging from high to low, were as follows: isoniazid (229 [82.37%]), streptomycin (177 [63.67%]), ethambutol (144 [51.80%]), pyrazinamide (PZA, 119 [42.81%]), fluoroquinolones (FQs, 93 [33.45%]). Further, the clofazimine, bedaquiline, and delamanid resistance rates were 2.88, 2.88, and 1.04%, respectively. The gene composition cluster rate was 32.37% (90/278). In addition, 83.81% (233/278) of MDR/RR-TB cases were determined to be likely caused by transmission. Finally, patients infected with lineage two strains and strains with the KatG S315T amino acid substitution presented a higher risk of MDR/RR-TB transmission. CONCLUSION: Transmission plays a significant role in the MDR/RR-TB burden in Sichuan province, and lineage 2 strains and strains harboring KatG S315T have a high probability of transmission. Further, high levels of FQ and PZA drug resistance suggest an urgent need for drug susceptibility testing prior to designing therapeutic regimens. New anti-TB drugs need to be used standardly and TB strains should be regularly monitored for resistance to these drugs.

The environment of healthcare institutions plays a major role in the transmission of multidrug resistant organisms (MDRO) and likely in subsequent healthcare-associated infections (HAIs). Probiotic cleaning products are a novel option for environmental cleaning. They represent a sustainable and biodegradable alternative to conventional chemical disinfectants for controlling microbial bioburden, and preventing pathogen transmission in hospital environments. High-quality studies including randomized clinical trials (RCT) triggered a summary with expert recommendations until further studies allow a critical review and meta-analysis of the data. METHODS: Infection control experts from five European countries summarized available data as of June 2023. Authors presented their published RCTs, reviewed the existing literature on probiotic cleaning, summarized the results and identified knowledge gaps and subsequent research needs. RESULTS: Probiotic cleaning was similarly effective for reducing HAI-related pathogens, enveloped viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 and MDRO in environmental samples compared to conventional chemical disinfectants. More importantly, probiotic cleaning was non-inferior to disinfectants in terms of preventing HAI in a large RCT. In addition, probiotic cleaning has also been shown to reduce antimicrobial resistance genes (ARG), costs and antimicrobial consumption in other hospital trials. They are biodegradable, do not require any protection for chemical hazards, and are compliant with occupational health. A paradigm shift, however, requires a very strong evidence to justify for such a change. In the past, this evidence was limited by the heterogeneity of study design, products, protocols, and few studies on clinical outcomes used in the trials. Furthermore, the regulatory, safety, and quality aspects of probiotic cleaning products are not, yet, completely defined and require clearing by authorities. CONCLUSION: To date, probiotic cleaning is a breakthrough technology and a biological alternative for chemical disinfectant when treating hospital environment. It may also have a positive effect on MDRO transmission. However, the different compositions of probiotic products will require standardization, and more robust data should be generated to support these promising results on different compositions. This may trigger a paradigm shift in cleaning of healthcare institutions from chemical to biological control of the hospital environment.

More than 50% of patients with hand eczema (HE) are colonized with Staphylococcus aureus. Comprehensive knowledge of the skin microbiome and its changes in patients with HE may provide insights into future potential therapeutical targets. OBJECTIVE: To describe the skin microbiome in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic HE and assess its changes following treatment with topical corticosteroids (TCS). METHODS: Bacterial samples were collected from lesional and nonlesional skin before and after 2 weeks of TCS treatment using ESwabs and analysed by 16S rRNA and tuf gene sequencing. Clinically, the disease severity was assessed by the Hand Eczema Severity Index (HECSI). RESULTS: A cohort of 31 patients with HE were included and followed up. Compared to nonlesional skin, lesional skin differed in overall bacterial community composition (p = 0.02), displayed higher relative abundance of Staphylococcus, in particular S. aureus (p = 0.01) and lower abundance of Micrococcus (p = 0.02). As disease severity improved with treatment, these microbial characteristics on lesional skin shifted towards that of nonlesional skin on the hands. CONCLUSION: The bacterial skin microbiome was altered in lesions of HE and partly driven by S. aureus colonization, however, shifted towards nonlesional skin following treatment. Our results emphasize the future possibilities for anti-S. aureus treatment strategies.

The increase in metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) has advanced our understanding of the functional characterization and taxonomic assignment within the human microbiome. However, MAGs, as population consensus genomes, often aggregate heterogeneity among species and strains, thereby obfuscating the precise relationships between microbial hosts and mobile genetic elements (MGEs). In contrast, single amplified genomes (SAGs) derived via single-cell genome sequencing can capture individual genomic content, including MGEs. RESULTS: We introduce the first substantial SAG dataset (bbsag20) from the human oral and gut microbiome, comprising 17,202 SAGs above medium-quality without co-assembly. This collection unveils a diversity of bacterial lineages across 312 oral and 647 gut species, demonstrating different taxonomic compositions from MAGs. Moreover, the SAGs showed cellular-level evidence of the translocation of oral bacteria to the gut. We also identified broad-host-range MGEs harboring antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs), which were not detected in the MAGs. CONCLUSIONS: The difference in taxonomic composition between SAGs and MAGs indicates that combining both methods would be effective in expanding the genome catalog. By connecting mobilomes and resistomes in individual samples, SAGs could meticulously chart a dynamic network of ARGs on MGEs, pinpointing potential ARG reservoirs and their spreading patterns in the microbial community. Video Abstract.

Information on medicinal clay deposits that occur in Silesia and are traditionally used in ethnomedicine or ancient medicine and known as terra sigillata Silesiaca or SHC, was selected on available source materials and old prints and maps from the archives of the Polish Geological Institute (Wrocław, Poland). Subsequently, their places of occurrence were identified and traced in the field by taking three deposits from the Silesia territory: Upper Silesia (D1), Opole Silesia (D2), and Lower Silesian (D3) Voivodeships for analysis. Their basic parameters and antimicrobial efficacy against pathogenic bacteria, Gram-positive streptococci and staphylococci, including methicillin-resistant strains, were examined. The study evaluated the effects of clays on growth and vitality using a primary dermal fibroblast line (NHDF) and a monocytic line (THP1). Studies were performed on a cell culture model to determine the effects on tissue regeneration (fibroblasts) and anti-inflammatory effects (monocytes). The study attempted to identify the mechanism of antimicrobial action, especially the textural characteristics and geochemical composition, as well as the environmental reaction (pH). RESULTS: SHCs were classified into the following textural classes: clay loam (D1), clay (D2), and sand (D3). The tested deposits have antimicrobial properties that reduce the bacterial population (104 CFU) compared to the control (108 CFU). The antimicrobial effect depends on the type of clay and the species or strain of bacteria used. In-house studies clearly showed that Staphylococcus aureus Pcm 2054 and Staphylococcus epidermidis MRSE ATCC 2538 cells were completely adsorbed by clay minerals from clay D3.13. Furthermore, 10% leachates also showed an antimicrobial effect, as a reduction in bacterial populations was observed ranging from 91 to 100%. The results showed stimulation of fibroblast culture proliferation and inhibition of the growth of inflammatory cells (monocytes). CONCLUSION: SHCs tested have antimicrobial potential, in particular D2.7, D2.11, and D3.13. The D3.13 deposit had a bactericidal effect against the staphylococci tested. Aqueous solutions of clays also showed bacteriostatic effect. The results obtained in cell culture model tests indicate properties that modulate the healing process - stimulation of fibroblast growth (NHDF line) and inhibition of monocyte growth (THP1 line).

At the end of 2021, an epidemic of reproductive abnormalities in cows occurred in Jilin Province, China, posing an urgent need for a rapid diagnosis. RESULTS: To identify the cause of the disease, a total of 172 samples were collected from 21 dead calves and 45 aborting or pregnant cows in 10 farms across the province. Routine PCR or RT-PCR detection did not find any common abortion-related agents. We then employed the viromics-based precision diagnosis method to analyze these samples, and the read-based annotation showed signals of an Akabane disease virus (AKAV) in some libraries. To further identify the virus, nested RT-PCR detection revealed that 52.3% (11/21) of dead calves and 26.6% (12/45) of cows were positive for the virus. Phylogenetic analysis of the partial fragments showed that the S segment of the virus was 100% identical to the Chinese strain TJ2016, but its M and L segments shared 94.3% and 96.5% identities with an Israeli strain. CONCLUSIONS: The viromic and molecular results suggested that these animals were infected with a reassortant AKAV. Coupled with the clinical signs, the virus should be responsible for the epizootic, highlighting that molecular and serological surveys of the virus in cows during early pregnancy, as well as ecological investigation in its arthropod vectors, are necessary.

The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral reservoir remain poorly understood. RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research field. CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an effective cure for HIV.

Disporopsis, a member of the Liliaceae family and a perennial herb, is predominantly cultivated in southwestern and southeastern China. Its rhizome, referred to as Zhugenqi, serves as a traditional Chinese medicinal herb for the treatment of bone injuries. However, viral diseases have emerged as a significant challenge in the cultivation of Disporopsis. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to identify and characterize viruses present in diseased samples of Disporopsis spp. using high-throughput sequencing (HTS) and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) to enhance the understanding of the virome associated with Disporopsis and to inform diagnostic and control strategies for viral diseases in this plant. METHODS: Diseased samples of Disporopsis spp. were subjected to HTS and RT-PCR for virus identification. A total of five viruses were detected, including three novel viruses and two known viruses. The novel viruses were provisionally named Disporopsis chlorotic stripe virus (DCSV), Disporopsis pernyi-associated partitivirus (DaPTV), and Disporopsis pernyi-associated lispi-like virus (DaLV). Sequence identity and phylogenetic analyses were performed to confirm the novelty and taxonomic placement of these viruses. RESULTS: DCSV exhibited polyprotein sequence identities ranging from 47.6% to 83.6% with other potyviruses, with the highest identity (83.6%) shared with Polygonatum kingianum virus 5 (PKgV5). DaLV shared an amino acid sequence identity of 34.59% with maize suscal virus (MSV), and DaPTV shared an identity of 76.18-85.10% with Paris alphapartitivirus (ParAPV). Phylogenetic analyses supported the potential classification of the three novel viruses as new members of their respective genera. Two isolates of polygonatum mosaic-associated virus 1 (PMaV1) were identified in Disporopsis for the first time, showing divergences of 96.33% and 98.86% from existing isolates. RT-PCR analysis of 67 Disporopsis field samples collected from four cities in China revealed that more than half of the samples tested positive for at least one of the five viruses. PMaV1 and DaLV were the most prevalent, detected in 22 and 34 out of the 67 samples, respectively. Other viruses were detected at low rates and/or had limited distribution. CONCLUSION: This study provides insights into the virome infecting Disporopsis and offers valuable information for the diagnosis and control of viral diseases in this plant. The identification of five viruses, including three potential new members of their respective genera, contributes to the understanding of the viral threats to Disporopsis cultivation.

Ticks are significant vectors of pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, and protozoa. With approximately 900 tick species worldwide, many are expanding their geographical range due to changing socioeconomic and climate factors. The Danube Delta, one of Europe's largest wetlands, is an ecosystem that, despite its ecological importance, remains understudied concerning the risk of introducing new tick-borne viruses. This region serves as a critical habitat for migratory birds, which can carry ticks over long distances, potentially introducing exotic tick species and their pathogens into the local ecosystem. Hyalomma marginatum ticks, the primary vector of Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus (CCHFV), are of particular concern due to their expanding presence in Europe and potential to spread other arboviruses. In addition to being the primary vector for CCHFV, Hyalomma sp. ticks are capable of transmitting other pathogens of medical and veterinary importance, including Dugbe virus, West Nile virus, African horse sickness virus, and Kyasanur forest disease virus. Therefore, it is essential to monitor the presence of Hyalomma sp. ticks while simultaneously surveilling arbovirus circulation in tick populations to mitigate the risk of arboviral outbreaks. METHODS: In this work, we used an RNA sequencing technique to analyze the virome of H. marginatum ticks collected from the Danube Delta Biosphere Reserve, Romania, one of the major bird migration hubs from Africa to Europe. RESULTS: Among the viral taxa detected in H. marginatum ticks, sequences belonging to Volzhskoe tick virus (VTV), Balambala tick virus (BMTV) and Bole tick virus 4 (BTV4) were identified. In addition, we report the first identification of a novel Rhabdoviridae-related virus, Hyalomma marginatum rhabdovirus (HMRV). No CCHFV or any CCHFV-related nairovirus were detected in this study. CONCLUSIONS: To summarize, detecting new viruses is essential for monitoring potential viral outbreaks. Our research expands the understanding of virus diversity in Eastern Europe, including the identification of novel viruses. This insight is crucial for monitoring viruses that may pose risks to both animal and human health, such as CCHFV.

Chronic gingivostomatitis in cats (FCGS) is a moderately to severely painful condition, potentially caused by inadequate immune response to oral antigenic stimulation. Salivary peptidome analysis can identify inflammatory protein mediators and pathways involved in oral mucosal immune activation and may indicate potential therapeutic options for FCGS. OBJECTIVE: Evaluate the diversity and abundance of salivary peptides in cats with FCGS using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization-time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) and nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS). ANIMALS: Thirty-two cats with FCGS and 18 healthy controls. METHODS: Case-control cross-sectional study. We compared the salivary peptide profiles of diseased and healthy cats. The diagnosis of FCGS was confirmed by histopathology. Saliva samples were analyzed for viral infections using polymerase chain reaction (PCR), peptide mass fingerprint (PMF) using MALDI-TOF MS, and peptide identification using nano LC-MS/MS. RESULTS: Distinct clusters of peptide profiles were observed between groups. In FCGS, 26 salivary peptides were altered, including apolipoprotein A1, nuclear receptor subfamily 1 group I member 3, fibrinogen alpha chain, interleukin 2 receptor gamma, interleukin 23 receptor, hemoglobin subunit alpha, and serpin peptidase inhibitor clade A (alpha-1 antiproteinase, antitrypsin) member 12, protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, and cholinergic receptor nicotinic alpha 10 subunit. Protein-anti-inflammatory drug interaction networks were observed. CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Peptide mass fingerprint and peptide profiles identified distinct clusters between FCGS and healthy cats. The 9 novel salivary peptide markers were associated with the JAK/STAT and PI3K/Akt pathways and immune responses. These potentially noninvasive biomarkers may facilitate understanding of FCGS pathophysiology and guide future therapeutic research.

The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has emerged as a global health crisis, with clinical manifestations including those suggesting injury to various organs such as the ovaries, which implies that it extends beyond respiratory infections. Changes in gut microbiota may exhibit correlations with the mechanisms and stages of severity in COVID-19, as well as a link with sex hormones, embryo development, and pregnancy. Controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) is used to induce the development of multiple high-quality follicles during in vitro fertilization (IVF). Our research aimed to investigate whether patients infected with COVID-19 have altered gut microbiota compositions that would affect the outcomes of COS. METHODS: Twenty-one healthy females and seventeen patients with COVID-19 were enrolled. Samples were sequenced for gut microbiota identification through 16 S rRNA V3-V4 region, including species annotation, community diversity, and community functions. RESULTS: No significant differences were found between the groups in terms of in IVF cycle outcomes and laboratory parameters. Patients with COVID-19 and healthy women showed no significant difference in the total number of available blastocyst embryos. Furthermore, the gut microbiota alpha diversity index in the COVID-19 group were markedly reduced compared to those of healthy females. Comparing the COVID-19 group to the controls, the gut microbiota dysbiosis decreased levels of Ruminococcus, and Agathobater, and elevated levels of Achromobacter and Raistonia. Finally, we identified a series of microbial functional characteristics, including membrane transport and carbohydrate metabolism, that exhibited significant disparities between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Patients in the COVID-19 group exhibited significant disparities in the gut microbiota composition compared to the healthy women during COS. However, the IVF outcomes did not show any significant differences between the two groups. Collectively, our speculation suggests that SARS-COV-2 infection may alter the gut microbiota without impacting IVF outcomes.

Evidence has accumulated to demonstrate that intestinal microbiome can inhibit viral infection. However, our knowledge of the signaling pathways and identity of specific commensal microbes that mediate the antiviral response is limited. Zebrafish have emerged as a powerful animal model for study of vertebrate-microbiota interactions. Here, a rhabdoviral infection model in zebrafish allows us to investigate the modes of action of microbiome-mediated antiviral effect. RESULTS: We observed that oral antibiotics-treated and germ-free zebrafish exhibited greater spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV) infection. Mechanistically, depletion of the intestinal microbiome alters TLR2-Myd88 signaling and blunts neutrophil response and type I interferon (IFN) antiviral innate immunity. Through 16S rRNA sequencing of the intestinal contents from control and antibiotic(s)-treated fish, we identified a single commensal bacterial species, Cetobacterium somerae, that can restore the TLR2- and neutrophil-dependent type I IFN response to restrict SVCV infection in gnotobiotic zebrafish. Furthermore, we found that C. somerae exopolysaccharides (CsEPS) was the effector molecule that engaged TLR2 to mediate the type I IFN-dependent antiviral function. CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results suggest a conserved role of intestinal microbiome in regulating type I IFN antiviral response among vertebrates and reveal that the intestinal microbiome inhibits viral infection through a CsEPS-TLR2-type I IFN signaling axis in zebrafish. Video Abstract.

Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa (Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as antibiotic use.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis and related immune dysfunction have been associated with the pathogenesis of Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection in infants with neonatal cholestasis (NC) as previously reported by us. However, the interaction of a perturbed microbiome, HCMV infection, and dysregulated immunity leading to exacerbation of disease severity has not been investigated so far. In this study, we examined the association of gut microbiome, host inflammatory and homeostatic markers that are likely to govern increased pathogenesis of NC in HCMV infected IgM positive infants (N = 15) compared to IgM negative (N = 15) individuals. Stool samples of HCMV infected infants and age-matched healthy controls (N = 10) were assessed for gut bacteria-derived metabolites like short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), cytokines and markers of gut barrier integrity. Data were correlated with previously determined gut microbiome composition and frequency of immune cell subsets. Finally, validation of clinical potential was undertaken by principal component analysis (PCA) of integrated data to delineate the spectrum of clinical pathology. RESULTS: Significantly lower levels of SCFAs and elevated fecal levels of soluble inflammatory mediators were observed in IgM positive HCMV infected infants. Further, increased plasma LPS levels and markers of gut permeability, suggestive of microbial translocation due to a 'leaky gut' were observed in HCMV infected IgM positive group. PCA of integrated data revealed clearly disparate profiles representative of IgM positive, IgM negative, and uninfected healthy states. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest the utility of an integrated approach involving dysregulated microbiome-immune axis for gaining a better understanding of pathogenesis associated with HCMV infection in NC.

Infection is the cause of diarrhoea, and rotaviruses and adenoviruses are important pathogens in children. METHODS: A retrospective study was conducted on 144,067 children with diarrhoea between 2014 and 2023 in China. We used the colloidal gold method to detect intestinal adenovirus and rotavirus A antigens in faeces. The epidemiological characteristics of these viruses and the impact of meteorological factors on them were analysed before and after coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. RESULTS: During this decade, the positive rate of adenovirus infection was 6.41%, while the positive rate of rotavirus A infection was 11.81%, higher than that of adenovirus infection. The positive rate of adenovirus and rotavirus A coinfection was 1.92%. The positive rates of adenovirus, rotavirus A and coinfection showed a fluctuating trend, and suddenly decreased in 2020. There was an apparent decrease of positive rate of rotavirus A, with a decrease of 57.27%, during 2020-2023. Surprisingly, the positive rate of adenovirus infection exceeded that of rotavirus A infection in 2021 and 2023. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the proportion of female patients and children over two years of age infected with adenovirus or rotavirus A increased, while the proportion of cases in winter decreased. In addition, we found that the positive rate of rotavirus A infection was related to average temperature and sunshine, and the positive rate of adenovirus and rotavirus A coinfection was only related to sunshine. However, these correlations disappeared during the COVID-19 pandemic. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed the recent prevalence of adenovirus and rotavirus A infections in children with diarrhoea in south-central China and provided a theoretical basis for the prevention and control of viral diarrhoea.

Bats (Order Chiroptera) are an important reservoir of emerging zoonotic microbes, including viruses of public health concern such as henipaviruses, lyssaviruses, and SARS-related coronaviruses. Despite the continued discovery of new viruses in bat populations, a significant proportion of these viral agents remain uncharacterized, highlighting the imperative for additional research aimed at elucidating their evolutionary relationship and taxonomic classification. RESULTS: In order to delve deeper into the viral reservoir hosted by bats, the present study employed Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology to analyze 13,105 swab samples obtained from various locations in China. Analysis of 378 sample pools revealed the presence of 846 vertebrate-associated viruses. Subsequent thorough examination, adhering to the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) criteria for virus classification, identified a total of 120 putative viral species with the potential to emerge as novel viruses, comprising a total of 294 viral strains. Phylogenetic analysis of conserved genomic regions indicated the novel virus exhibited a diverse array of viral lineages and branches, some of which displayed close genetic relationships to known human and livestock pathogens, such as poxviruses and pestiviruses. CONCLUSIONS: This study investigates the breadth of DNA and RNA viruses harbored by bats, delineating several novel evolutionary lineages and offering significant contributions to virus taxonomy. Furthermore, the identification of hitherto unknown viruses with relevance to human and livestock health underscores the importance of this study in encouraging infectious disease monitoring and management efforts in both public health and veterinary contexts. Video Abstract.

We performed a prospective single-center convenience sample study between January 2019 and July 2021 in a case-control design. Routine diagnostics included conventional cultures (blood, cerebrospinal fluid, urine), PCRs and inflammatory markers in infants aged < 90 days with clinical LOS. We additionally analyzed blood lymphocyte subsets including CD4 + CD25 + forkhead box protein (FoxP3)+ Tregs and performed 16 S rRNA sequencing of stool samples, both compared to age-matched healthy controls. Results were adjusted for potential confounders that may influence microbial composition. RESULTS: 51 infants with fever and clinical LOS were enrolled. Bacterial sepsis was diagnosed in n = 24 (47.1%) and viral infection in n = 13 (25.5%) infants, whereas in 14 (27.3%) infants the cause of fever remained undetermined. When compared to healthy controls, the gut microbiome of LOS infants at disease onset was characterized by a shift in community composition, specifically, decreased abundance of B. longum and an increase of Bacteroidia spp. Intriguingly, the abundance of B. longum negatively correlated with the frequency of blood CD4-positive cells in healthy controls but not in infants with LOS. At one year of age, we observed microbiome differences in infants with history of LOS when compared to healthy controls, such as an increased gut microbial diversity. CONCLUSION: Our data suggest potential signatures of the microbiome-immunity interplay in infants with LOS, which should be investigated further as possible targets for prevention.

In this study, we analyzed the multi-kingdom gut microbiome (i.e., bacteriome, mycobiome, and virome) of 25 CHB-LF patients and 28 healthy individuals through whole-metagenome shotgun sequencing of their stool samples. RESULTS: We found that the gut bacteriome, mycobiome, and virome of CHB-LF patients were fundamentally altered, characterized by a panel of 110 differentially abundant bacterial species, 16 differential fungal species, and 90 differential viruses. The representative CHB-LF-enriched bacteria included members of Blautia_A (e.g., B. wexlerae, B. massiliensis, and B. obeum), Dorea (e.g., D. longicatena and D. formicigenerans), Streptococcus, Erysipelatoclostridium, while some species of Bacteroides (e.g., B. finegoldii and B. thetaiotaomicron), Faecalibacterium (mainly F. prausnitzii), and Bacteroides_A (e.g., B. plebeius_A and B. coprophilus) were depleted in patients. Fungi such as Malassezia spp. (e.g., M. japonica and M. sympodialis), Candida spp. (e.g., C. parapsilosis), and Mucor circinelloides were more abundant in CHB-LF patients, while Mucor irregularis, Phialophora verrucosa, Hortaea werneckii, and Aspergillus fumigatus were decreases. The CHB-LF-enriched viruses contained 18 Siphoviridae, 12 Myoviridae, and 1 Podoviridae viruses, while the control-enriched viruses included 16 Siphoviridae, 9 Myoviridae, 2 Quimbyviridae, and 1 Podoviridae_crAss-like members. Moreover, we revealed that the CHB-LF-associated gut multi-kingdom signatures were tightly interconnected, suggesting that they may act together on the disease. Finally, we showed that the microbial signatures were effective in discriminating the patients from healthy controls, suggesting the potential of gut microbiota in the prediction of CHB-LF and related diseases. DISCUSSION: In conclusion, our findings delineated the fecal bacteriome, mycobiome, and virome landscapes of the CHB-LF microbiota and provided biomarkers that will aid in future mechanistic and clinical intervention studies.

The choice of de novo assembler for high-throughput sequencing (HTS) data remains a pivotal factor in the HTS-based discovery of viral pathogens. This study assessed de novo assemblers, namely Trinity, SPAdes, and MEGAHIT for HTS datasets generated on the Illumina platform from 23 apple samples, representing 15 exotic and indigenous apple varieties and a rootstock. The assemblers were compared based on assembly quality metrics, including the largest contig, total assembly length, genome coverage, and N50. RESULTS: MEGAHIT was most efficient assembler according to the metrics evaluated in this study. By using multiple assemblers, near-complete genome sequences of citrus concave gum-associated virus (CCGaV), apple rubbery wood virus 1 (ARWV-1), ARWV-2, apple necrotic mosaic virus (ApNMV), apple mosaic virus, apple stem pitting virus, apple stem grooving virus, apple chlorotic leaf spot virus, apple hammerhead viroid and apple scar skin viroid were reconstructed. These viruses were further confirmed through Sanger sequencing in different apple cultivars. Among them, CCGaV, ARWV-1 and ARWV-2 were recorded from apples in India for the first time. The analysis of virus richness revealed that ApNMV was dominant, followed by ARWV-1 and CCGaV. Moreover, MEGAHIT identified novel single-nucleotide variants. CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses highlight the crucial role of assembly methods in reconstructing near-complete apple virus genomes from the Illumina reads. This study emphasizes the significance of employing multiple assemblers for de novo virus genome assembly in vegetatively propagated perennial fruit crops.

SLE-related RNA-Seq data were retrieved from public databases. A rigorous computational workflow was employed to identify the human viruses. Differential expression analysis and functional enrichment analysis were conducted in R. RESULTS: We identified ten human virus species from 826 RNA-Seq samples of human blood, comprising 688 SLE patients and 138 healthy controls. Eight of the ten virus species exhibited higher positive rates in SLE patients compared to healthy controls, with Human betaherpesvirus 5 (HHV5) having the highest positive rate (4.1%) and being exclusively detected in SLE samples. The virus abundances were low and comparable in both SLE patients and healthy controls. Analysis of the antiviral interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in samples showed higher ISG expression levels in HHV4 and HHV5-positive samples compared to virus-negative samples. Several genes that were up-regulated in SLE patients were further up-regulated after HHV5 infection, and they were mainly enriched in immune response-related biological processes. Additionally, the expression levels of several marker genes of SLE severity were compared between HHV5-positive and virus-negative SLE patients, suggesting that HHV5 infection may be associated with aggravated SLE disease. DISCUSSION: We found that SLE patients are more susceptible to viral infections than healthy individuals. Viral infections, such as HHV5, may be associated with aggravated SLE disease. This study deepens our understanding of the association between viruses and SLE and provides new insights into prevention and control of the disease.

We employed Phage ImmunoPrecipitation Sequencing to profile serum antibodies against the human proteome, the human virome, and a comprehensive enterovirus library. We analyzed sera from 57 patients with anti-MDA5 autoantibodies and 57 patients with anti-SRP autoantibodies, as well as 57 healthy controls. All groups were matched for age, sex, and race. RESULTS: Our autoantibody profiling results define specific immunogenic regions within the MDA5 and SRP autoantigens. We also discovered that in MDA5 sera, versus SRP sera, there was an elevated antibody response to the viral capsid protein 1 (VP1) of enterovirus B, which was accompanied by a decreased antibody response to rhinovirus A. CONCLUSION: Considering the role of MDA5 as a sensor of picornaviral infections and a mediator of inflammatory signaling, our data suggest a novel etiologic link between enterovirus infection and anti-MDA5 dermatomyositis.

Extensive research on the diversity and functional roles of the microorganisms associated with reef-building corals has been promoted as a consequence of the rapid global decline of coral reefs attributed to climate change. Several studies have highlighted the importance of coral-associated algae (Symbiodinium) and bacteria and their potential roles in promoting coral host fitness and survival. However, the complex coral holobiont extends beyond these components to encompass other entities such as protists, fungi, and viruses. While each constituent has been individually investigated in corals, a comprehensive understanding of their collective roles is imperative for a holistic comprehension of coral health and resilience. RESULTS: The metagenomic analysis of the microbiome of the coral Oculina patagonica has revealed that fungi of the genera Aspergillus, Fusarium, and Rhizofagus together with the prokaryotic genera Streptomyces, Pseudomonas, and Bacillus were abundant members of the coral holobiont. This study also assessed changes in microeukaryotic, prokaryotic, and viral communities under three stress conditions: aquaria confinement, heat stress, and Vibrio infections. In general, stress conditions led to an increase in Rhodobacteraceae, Flavobacteraceae, and Vibrionaceae families, accompanied by a decrease in Streptomycetaceae. Concurrently, there was a significant decline in both the abundance and richness of microeukaryotic species and a reduction in genes associated with antimicrobial compound production by the coral itself, as well as by Symbiodinium and fungi. CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the interplay between microeukaryotic and prokaryotic components of the coral holobiont may be disrupted by stress conditions, such as confinement, increase of seawater temperature, or Vibrio infection, leading to a dysbiosis in the global microbial community that may increase coral susceptibility to diseases. Further, microeukaryotic community seems to exert influence on the prokaryotic community dynamics, possibly through predation or the production of secondary metabolites with anti-bacterial activity. Video Abstract.

Eosinophils were isolated from the peripheral blood of healthy volunteers, patients with non-eCOPD, and those with ACO/eCOPD. Multi-omics analysis involving transcriptomics, proteomics, and lipidomics was performed, followed by bioinformatic data analyses. In vitro experiments using eosinophils from healthy volunteers were conducted to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying cellular alterations in eosinophils. RESULTS: Proteomics and transcriptomics analyses revealed cellular characteristics in overall COPD patients represented by viral infection (elevated expression of sterol regulatory element-binding protein-1) and inflammatory responses (elevated levels of IL1 receptor-like 1, Fc epsilon receptor Ig, and transmembrane protein 176B). Cholesterol metabolism enzymes were identified as ACO/eCOPD-related factors. Gene Ontology and pathway enrichment analyses demonstrated the key roles of antiviral responses, cholesterol metabolism, and inflammatory molecules-related signaling pathways in ACO/eCOPD. Lipidomics showed the impaired synthesis of cyclooxygenase-derived mediators including prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in ACO/eCOPD. In vitro assessment confirmed that IL-33 or TNF-α stimulation combined with IL-5 and IFN-γ stimulation induced cellular signatures in eosinophils in ACO/eCOPD. Atorvastatin, dexamethasone, and PGE2 differentially modulated these inflammatory changes. DISCUSSION: ACO/eCOPD is associated with viral infection and an inflammatory milieu. Therapeutic strategies using statins and inhaled corticosteroids are recommended to control these pathogenic changes.

A total of 323 influent and 33 effluent wastewater samples were collected from three Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTPs) using a 24-h composite Moore swab sampling method from February to November 2023. The virus was captured using Ceres Nanotrap® Enhancement Reagent 2 and Nanotrap® Microbiome A Particles, and then nucleic acids were extracted using the Qiagen QIAamp Viral RNA Mini Kit. The ThermoFisher TaqPath™ COVID-19 kit was applied to perform real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) to quantify the SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Wastewater viral concentrations were normalized using flow rate and number of people served. In the sampling period, spearman correlation was used to compare the SARS-CoV-2 target gene concentration to the reported COVID-19 cases. The numbers of infected individuals under each treatment plant were calculated considering the target genes' concentration, the flow rate of treatment plants, a gram of feces per person-day, and RNA copies per gram of feces. RESULTS: SARS-CoV-2 was detected in 94% of untreated wastewater samples. All effluent wastewater samples (n = 22) from the upflow anaerobic sludge blanket (UASB) reactor and membrane bioreactor (MBR) technology were SARS-COV-2 RNA negative. In contrast, two out of 11 effluents from Waste Stabilization Pond were found positive. Positive correlations were observed between the weekly average SARS-CoV-2 concentration and the cumulative weekly reported COVID-19 cases in Addis Ababa. The estimated number of infected people in the Kality Treatment catchment area was 330 times the number of COVID-19 cases reported during the study period in Addis Ababa. DISCUSSION: This study revealed that SARS-CoV-2 was circulating in the community and confirmed previous reports of more asymptomatic COVID-19 cases in Ethiopia. Additionally, this study provides further evidence of the importance of wastewater-based surveillance in general to monitor infectious diseases in low-income settings. CONCLUSION: Wastewater-based surveillance of SARS-CoV-2 can be a useful method for tracking the increment of COVID-19 cases before it spreads widely throughout the community.

Gut microbiota play important roles in several diseases like viral infections. In this systematic review, our objective was to assess the efficacy and safety of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) in treating various viral diseases. METHODS: We conducted searches on databases including PubMed, Web of Science, Scopus, and Google Scholar until November 2023. Clinical trials reported outcomes related to safety of FMT or its efficacy in patients with viral diseases were included. We excluded other types of studies that enrolled healthy individuals or patients with other disorders and did not use FMT. The assessment of bias risk was conducted using the National Institutes of Health (NIH) study quality evaluation tool. RESULTS: Eight studies with total 196 participants were included. Viral diseases were human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B, COVID-19 and Clostridioides difficile coinfection, and cytomegalovirus colitis. In hepatitis B cases, HBeAg clearance was significant in those received FMT (p<0.01), while it was not significant in another one (p = 0.19). A clinical response was noted in 37.5% of patients with cytomegalovirus colitis, with an equal percentage achieving clinical remission post-FMT. There was a significant reduction in Clostridioides difficile relapse rate in FMT group than controls in coinfection of Clostridioides difficile and COVID-19 (2.17% vs. 42.5%, p<0.05). In patients with HIV, partial engraftment of the donor microbiome and increases in alpha diversity were observed after FMT. No severe adverse events were reported. Most studies had fair or good qualities. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed FMT as a promising, safe treatment for some viral diseases. It improved viral clearance, clinical outcomes, and inflammation. However, the varying responses and small sample sizes call for more trials on FMT in viral diseases.

Birds are known to harbour many pathogens, including circovirus, herpesviruses, adenoviruses and Chlamydia psittaci. Some of these pose zoonotic risks, while others, such as beak and feather disease virus (BFDV), have a significant impact on the conservation of endangered bird species. OBJECTIVES: This study was aimed to determine the faecal virome of a group of apparently healthy Monk parakeet using high-throughput sequencing. METHODS: Fresh faecal samples were collected from four Monk parakeets at a pet shop in Melbourne, Australia. Virus enrichment and nucleic acid extraction were performed on the faecal samples, followed by high-throughput sequencing at the Australian Genome Research Facility (AGRF). RESULTS: Utilising an established pipeline for high-throughput sequencing data analysis, this study revealed the presence of three viruses of the families Circoviridae, Parvoviridae and Adenoviridae. Subsequent sequence comparison and phylogenetic analyses further confirmed that the detected viruses belong to the genera Chaphamaparvovirus (unassigned species), Circovirus (species Circovirus parrot) and Siadenovirus (species Siadenovirus viridis). CONCLUSION: Despite non-pathogenicity, the existence of multiple viruses within a bird species underscores the risk of these viruses spreading into the pet trade. Detection and a better understanding of avian viruses are crucial for the establishment of appropriate management and biosecurity measures in the domestic and international bird trade, which ultimately supports the conservation of vulnerable bird species.

HIV-1 infection is characterized by a massive depletion of mucosal CD4 T cells that triggers a cascade of events ultimately linking gut microbial dysbiosis to HIV-1 disease progression and pathogenesis. The association between HIV infection and the enteric virome composition is less characterized, although viruses are an essential component of the gut ecosystem. Here, we performed a cross-sectional analysis of the fecal viral (eukaryotic viruses and bacteriophages) and bacterial microbiome in people with HIV (PWH) and in HIV-negative individuals. To gain further insight into the association between the gut microbiome composition, HIV-associated immunodeficiency, and immune recovery, we carried out a longitudinal study including 14 PWH who initiated antiretroviral therapy (ART) and were followed for 24 months with samplings performed at baseline (before ART) and at 2, 6, 12, and 24 months post-ART initiation. RESULTS: Our data revealed a striking expansion in the abundance and prevalence of several human virus genomic sequences (Anelloviridae, Adenoviridae, and Papillomaviridae) in stool samples of PWH with severe immunodeficiency (CD4 < 200). We also noted a decreased abundance of sequences belonging to two plant viruses from the Tobamovirus genus, a reduction in bacterial alpha diversity, and a decrease in Inoviridae bacteriophage sequences. Short-term ART (24 months) was linked to a significant decrease in human Anelloviridae sequences. Remarkably, the detection of Anellovirus sequences at baseline independently predicted poor immune recovery, as did low CD4 T cell counts. The bacterial and bacteriophage populations were unique to each PWH with individualized trajectories; we found no discernable pattern of clustering after 24 months on ART. CONCLUSION: Advanced HIV-1 infection was associated with marked alterations in the virome composition, in particular a remarkable expansion of human anelloviruses, with a gradual restoration after ART initiation. In addition to CD4 T cell counts, anellovirus sequence detection might be useful to predict and monitor immune recovery. This study confirms data on the bacteriome and expands our knowledge on the viral component of the gut microbiome in HIV-1 infection. Video Abstract.

The rhizosphere microbiome is critical for promoting plant growth and mitigating soil-borne pathogens. However, its role in fighting soil-borne virus-induced diseases, such as wheat yellow mosaic virus (WYMV) transmitted by Polymyxa graminis zoospores, remains largely underexplored. In this study, we hypothesized that during viral infections, plant microbiomes engage in critical interactions with plants, with key microbes playing vital roles in maintaining plant health. Our research aimed to identify microbial taxa that not only suppress the disease but also boost wheat yield by using a blend of techniques, including field surveys, yield assessments, high-throughput sequencing of plant and soil microbiomes, microbial isolation, hydroponic experiments, and transcriptome sequencing. RESULTS: We found that, compared with roots and leaves, the rhizosphere microbiome showed a better performance in predicting wheat yield and the prevalence of P. graminis and WYMV across the three WYMV-impacted regions in China. Using machine learning, we found that healthy rhizospheres were marked with potentially beneficial microorganisms, such as Sphingomonas and Allorhizobium-Neorhizobium-Parararhizobium-Rhizobium, whereas diseased rhizospheres were associated with a higher prevalence of potential pathogens, such as Bipolaris and Fusicolla. Structural equation modeling showed that these biomarkers both directly and indirectly impacted wheat yield by modulating the rhizosphere microbiome and P. graminis abundance. Upon re-introduction of two key healthy rhizosphere biomarkers, Sphingomonas azotifigens and Rhizobium deserti, into the rhizosphere, wheat growth and health were enhanced. This was attributed to the up-regulation of auxin and cytokinin signaling pathways and the regulation of jasmonic acid and salicylic acid pathways during infections. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study revealed the critical role of the rhizosphere microbiome in combating soil-borne viral diseases, with specific rhizosphere microbes playing key roles in this process. Video Abstract.

The events during acute HIV infection (AHI) set the stage for the subsequent course of the disease. Early initiation of antiretroviral therapy (ART) has been associated with favorable immunovirological outcomes, yet the precise impact of ART timing during AHI remains unclear, particularly on lymphoid tissues. MATERIALS AND METHODS: The ACS cohort is a prospective cohort study in Belgium, collecting longitudinal clinical data and human bodily material (HBM) from people diagnosed and treated during AHI. The aim of the cohort is to study the impact of ART initiation during AHI on HIV reservoir and immune dysfunction in peripheral blood and anatomical sanctuary sites, as well as its effect on the gut microbiome. The cohort consists of two HBM sampling trajectories: one limited (blood, stool and leukapheresis) and a more extensive one (blood, stool, leukapheresis, colonoscopy, inguinal lymph node excision and lumbar puncture). Here we describe the baseline characteristics, immunovirological outcomes, safety and tolerability of HBM sampling. RESULTS: Between March 2016 and April 2024, 47 participants were enrolled, predominantly men who have sex with men (MSM), with a median age of 36 years [IQR 30-43.5]. Almost 90 % of participants initiated ART within 72 h after study inclusion, irrespective of HBM sampling trajectory. The timing of ART initiation according to the Fiebig stage did not significantly impact immune recovery (CD4/CD8 ratio ≥1) or the time to viral suppression. Approximately 40 % of participants opted for the extensive HBM sampling trajectory during AHI. However, the participation rate for the extensive trajectory decreased by nearly half at the longitudinal follow-up timepoint. In general, study-related procedures were safe and well-tolerated, with limited procedure-related adverse events (AEs). Inguinal lymph node excision was associated with the highest AE rate, in line with previous reports. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reaffirm the beneficial effect of ART initiation during AHI on long term immunovirological outcomes, regardless of Fiebig stage at treatment initiation. Additionally, we demonstrate that the collection of HBM during and longitudinally after AHI is safe and feasible, without compromising time to ART initiation. Cohorts that integrate comprehensive clinical data with high-quality HBM samples are essential to longitudinally study the impact of early ART on reservoir dynamics and immune responses across various anatomical sites after AHI.

Kawasaki disease is a rare systemic inflammatory syndrome that mainly affects children under five years of age and is the first cause of pediatric acquired cardiovascular disease. The pathogenesis is complex and a viral trigger is suspected, as well as genetic susceptibility. Multiple studies around the world have shown a decrease in the incidence of Kawasaki disease and have hypothesized that the different sanitary measures enforced in each country during the pandemic period could be responsible to a certain extent. The aim of this study is to evaluate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the disease's incidence, defining characteristics, coronary artery outcomes and management in a tertiary center in Switzerland. METHODS: This study is a retrospective analysis of children who have been diagnosed with Kawasaki disease that compares clinical, laboratory, SARS-CoV-2 exposure, and echocardiographic data as well as treatments before (January 1st 2017 to February 24th 2020) and during (February 25th 2020 to December 31st 2022) the COVID-19 pandemic in Switzerland. Statistical significance of differences in the compared parameters was assessed. RESULTS: Of the 90 patients included, 31 belonged to the first group and 59 belonged to the second group. There was a statistically significant (p < 0.05) increase in incidence during the pandemic period (5.91/100,000 children) of 88% compared to the pre-pandemic period (3.14/100,000 children). A lesser seasonal variation was observed during the pandemic. 30% of the patients in the pandemic group had an exposure to SARS-CoV-2. There was no other notable difference in demographic factors, clinical presentation, coronary outcome or administered treatment. CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first prolonged European study comparing Kawasaki disease before and during the COVID-19 pandemic. There was a significant increase in incidence in Kawasaki disease during the COVID-19 pandemic. In contrast, studies done in Japan, South Korea and the USA have shown a decrease in incidence. Differences in methodologies, genetics, ethnicities, environments, microbiome-altering behaviors, sanitary measures and SARS-CoV-2 spread are factors that should be considered. Further studies analyzing the differences between countries with increased incidence of Kawasaki disease could help better understand the relevance of such factors and provide more insight into the etiologies of this particular disease.

This study used a metagenomic approach with high throughput sequencing to make the first assessment of viral diversity in Caspian seals (Pusa caspica), the only marine mammal species endemic to the Caspian Sea. RESULTS: Sequencing libraries from 35 seals sampled 2009-2020 were analysed, finding sequences from the viral families Circoviridae, Parvoviridae, Herpesviridae, Papillomaviridae, Picornaviridae, Caliciviridae, Cruciviridae, Anelloviridae, Smacoviridae, and Orthomyxoviridae, with additional detection of Adenoviridae via PCR. The similarity of viral contigs from Caspian seal to sequences recovered from other pinnipeds ranged from 63.74% (San Miguel sea lion calicivirus) to 78.79% (Seal anellovirus 4). DISCUSSION: Some findings represent novel viral species, but overall, the viral repertoire of Caspian seals is similar to available viromes from other pinnipeds. Among the sequences recovered were partial contigs for influenza B, representing only the second such molecular identification in marine mammals. This work provides a foundation for further studies of viral communities in Caspian seals, the diversity of viromes in pinnipeds more generally, and contributes data relevant for disease risk assessments in marine mammals.

Early reports showed that patients with COVID-19 had recrudescence of previously resolved coccidioidomycosis (Valley fever, VF), and there were indications that coinfection had more severe outcomes. We therefore investigated serial infection of Coccidioides posadasii and SARS-CoV-2 in a K18-hACE2 mouse model to assess disease outcomes. METHODS: In our model, we challenged K18-hACE2 mice sequentially with a sub-lethal dose of SARS-CoV-2 and 24 hours later with low virulence strain of Coccidioides posadasii, and vice versa, compared to mice that only received a single infection challenge. We performed survival and pathogenesis mouse studies as well as looked at the systemic immune response differences between treatment groups. RESULTS: Here we show that co-infected groups have a more severe disease progression as well as a decrease in survival. Importantly, results differ depending on the SARS-CoV-2 variant (WA-1, Delta, or Omicron) and infection timing (SARS-CoV-2 first, C. posadasii second or vice versa). We find that groups that are infected with the virus first had a decrease in survival, increased morbidity and weight loss, increased fungal and viral burdens, differences in immune responses, and the amount and size of fungal spherules. We also find that groups coinfected with C. posadasii first have a decrease fungal burden and inflammatory responses. CONCLUSIONS: This is the first in vivo model investigation of a coinfection of SARS-CoV-2 and Coccidioides. Because of the potential for increased severity of disease in a coinfection, we suggest populations that live in areas of high coccidioidomycosis endemicity may experience higher incidence of complicated disease progression with COVID-19.

The results showed significant differences in the community composition structure (p < 0.01). Notable caries-associated pathogens in the dental plaque microbiome were depleted whilst health associated phylum Proteobacteria was increased in the abundance following fluoride-varnish application. In children with mixed dentition, this study found that after one month of fluoride-varnish treatment, there was a significant decrease in the prevalence of the dominant pathogenic genera, Fusobacterium, Porphyromonas, Capnocytophaga, Neisseria, and Leptrotrichia, along with an increase in certain genera related to healthy oral condition, mostly from the phylum Proteobacteria, such as Areinmonas, Pseudoxanthomonas, and Luteimonas. CONCLUSIONS: Fluoride-varnish application may shift the community level microecology from dysbiosis to eubiosis. Moreover, application of fluoride-varnish with weekly intervals for one month reduced the caries-causing bacteria while enriching the rise of unique, ubiquitous genera primarily belonging to the Proteobacteria, which may plaque a defensive role against progression of caries. Furthermore, a rising pH level towards neutrality (pH 7) indicated a healthier oral environment following the application of fluoride varnish.

Systemic alterations in the oral cavity can be reflected in skin disorders like psoriasis. However, data about oral health factors that are affected and controlled mainly by oral microbiota in atopic dermatitis (AD) are sparse. This study compared the oral status and oral microbiota of AD patients and healthy controls. METHODS: This was a prospective sex- and age-matched case-control study comparing adult participants with and without dermatologist-verified AD. A dentist assessed oral health status, and oral flora samples were collected and subjected to 16S rRNA sequencing for microbiome analysis. RESULTS: Forty-five AD participants and 41 non-AD controls were recruited. Compared to the participants in the control group, those with AD had significantly higher plaque levels (P = .04), poorer oral hygiene indices (P = .04), and higher gingival index trends (P = .05). The oral microbiome in the AD group showed significantly higher diversity, both in α and β diversities (P = .001, P = .0007, respectively). Furthermore, AD patients had a significantly increased abundance of taxa correlated with oral diseases and a decreased abundance of bacteria associated with a healthy oral status. CONCLUSION: AD appears to be associated with poor oral health and oral dysbiosis. There is a need to increase both patients' and physicians' awareness of oral health.

We propose a novel method called "Analysis of Microbiome Differential Abundance by Pooling Tobit Models" (ADAPT) to overcome these two challenges. ADAPT interprets zero counts as left-censored observations to avoid unfounded assumptions and complex models. ADAPT also encompasses a theoretically justified way of selecting non-differentially abundant microbiome taxa as a reference to reveal differentially abundant taxa while avoiding false discoveries. We generate synthetic data using independent simulation frameworks to show that ADAPT has more consistent false discovery rate control and higher statistical power than competitors. We use ADAPT to analyze 16S rRNA sequencing of saliva samples and shotgun metagenomics sequencing of plaque samples collected from infants in the COHRA2 study. The results provide novel insights into the association between the oral microbiome and early childhood dental caries. AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: The R package ADAPT can be installed from Bioconductor at https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ADAPT.html or from Github at https://github.com/mkbwang/ADAPT. The source codes for simulation studies and real data analysis are available at https://github.com/mkbwang/ADAPT_example.

Probiotics serve as a novel preventive or therapeutic approach for dental caries owing to their ability to reverse dysbiosis and restore a healthy microbiota. Here, we identified Burkholderia ambifaria AFS098024 as a probiotic candidate isolated from plants. METHODS: The safety of B. ambifaria was evaluated by hemolytic activity, D-lactic acid production and antibiotic susceptibility. In vitro biofilm model derived from the saliva of caries-free and caries-active donors and in vivo rat caries model were used to assess the efficacy of B. ambifaria in caries prevention and treatment. RESULTS: B. ambifaria was safe as a probiotic candidate and it could integrate with in vitro biofilm model. It significantly reduced the biomass and lactate production of biofilms from caries-active donors and disrupted biofilm structures. B. ambifaria effectively reduced the severity of carious lesions in rat molars, regardless of the inoculation sequence. Molars pretreated or treated with B. ambifaria demonstrated notably higher enamel volumes. Additionally, colonization of rat molars by B. ambifaria persisted for 6 weeks. CONCLUSION: The B. ambifaria strain used in this study holds promise as a probiotic for inhibiting dental caries, both in vitro and in vivo.

Experimental resin cements with UA concentrations of 0, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 wt% were prepared. Class I cavities were prepared on 50 extracted human molars and restored with composite inlays and experimental resin cements. Tooth samples were subjected to artificial caries induction for 10 days in a microcosm biofilm model using human saliva as an inoculum, and then mineral changes were evaluated using quantitative light-induced fluorescence (ΔF and ΔQ) and micro-computed tomography (CT). The bacterial composition of the human saliva was analyzed by 16 s RNA microbiome profiling. One-way analysis of variance with Tukey and Duncan post-hoc tests was employed for statistical analysis (p < 0.05). RESULTS: As the UA concentration increased, resin cement decreased ΔF and ΔQ before and after caries induction but showed a significant difference only in ΔQ at UA concentration ≥ 1.0 % (p < 0.05). The gray value analysis result of micro CT also showed a significant difference at UA concentration ≥ 1.0 % (p < 0.05). In the human saliva analysis, bacterial composition remained within normal oral microbiota ranges. CONCLUSION: Resin cements containing at least 1.0 % of UA exhibited an anticariogenic effect on dental microcosm biofilms. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: To reduce the failure of restorations, it is essential to prevent the occurrence of secondary caries. The application of UA in resin cement can be utilized to prevent the formation of secondary caries due to the anticariogenic effect of UA.

This prospective study aims to investigate the comparative effects of clear aligners (CA) and traditional removable appliances (RA) on the cariogenic risk of patients in mixed dentition, focusing on the oral microbiome. METHODS: 25 children were included and assigned into CA and RA groups. Supragingival plaque and saliva samples were collected, and clinical parameters including Decay-missing-filled teeth index (DMFT), Plaque Index (PI) and Gorelick Index (GI) were recorded before treatment (T0) and after 6-month follow-up (T1). DNA was extracted from supragingival plaque and saliva and analyzed via 16S rDNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: Clinical parameters showed no statistically significant difference between groups at each time point or within group over time (p > 0.05). In both RA and CA groups, saliva exhibited significantly higher alpha diversity compared to supragingival plaque at T1, as indicated by the significantly higher Chao1 and Shannon indexes (p < 0.05). Regarding beta diversity, significant difference was observed in saliva and supragingival plaque samples between T0 and T1 within group RA (p < 0.05, Adonis), whereas no such significance was noted in the CA group (p > 0.05, Adonis). At the genus level, Lactobacillus exhibited a statistically significant increase in saliva and supragingival plaque of group RA from T0 to T1 (p < 0.05), and an increasing trend in the group CA without statistical significance (p > 0.05). At T1, Lactobacillus levels were comparable between groups, whereas species-level analysis revealed distinct cariogenic species. CONCLUSION: Both clear aligners and traditional removable appliances resulted in elevated cariogenic risk of patients in mixed dentition at the microbial level. Distinct alterations in cariogenic species were observed to be induced by various orthodontic appliances.

The case-control study was conducted from April 2021 to January 2022 at the College of Dentistry, University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq, and comprised infants with age ranging from 1 day to 4 months. They were divided into complete cleft group A and control group B. Group A was subdivided into those with class III Veau's palatal classification, and the rest with class IV Veau's palatal classification. Samples were taken using oral swab which were subjected to colony morphology, gram staining and biochemical testing. Data was analysed using SPSS 21. RESULTS: Of the 52 subjects, 26(50%) were in each of the 2 groups. The subgroups of group A had 13(50%) patients each. The counting and colonisation of streptococcus mutans, lactobacilli and candida albicans were significantly higher in group A than in group B (p<0.05). The difference between the subgroups of group A was not significant (p>0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Infants with cleft palate were more susceptible to dental caries and oral infection than those with normal palate.

Seventy-one patients with primary endodontic infections were evaluated for percussion tenderness, presence of a sinus tract, presence of caries, sex, probing depth > 4 mm, and age. Samples from the root canals were obtained and the microbiome was subsequently characterized by 16 S rRNA amplicon sequencing. For the radiographic analysis, a subset of 12 samples with a periapical index (PAI) ≤ 2 were compared with 19 samples with PAI of 5. The Shannon and Chao1 indices were used to measure alpha diversity. Differences in abundances of genera were evaluated using the Kruskal-Wallis test with Bonferroni's correction. Differences in community composition were evaluated using analysis of similarity (ANOSIM) with Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices. RESULTS: No significant differences in microbiome composition relative to clinical factors were found using ANOSIM. Teeth within the two categories of periapical index showed a similar number of species richness, and alpha diversity values P > 0.05. Community composition was significantly affected by the periapical index (ANOSIM P = 0.039, R = 0.10). Larger radiographic lesions demonstrated significant increase in Prevotellaceae, Olsenella, and the motile bacteria Oribacterium, Selenomonadaceae spp., and Treponema. CONCLUSION: Clinical factors associated with apical periodontitis have a limited impact on the root canal microbiome composition. Community composition appears to be affected in teeth with large apical lesions.

This study was divided into two parts. In Part A, we investigated the user experiences with the P-113 containing oral spray. In part B, 14 subjects in the experimental group used the P-113-containing oral spray, while 14 subjects in the control group used a placebo without the P-113 in a 4-week clinical trial. Participants were asked to use the P-113-containing oral spray or placebo 3 times per day and 5 times per use. Moreover, 3 check-ups and 2 washouts were carried out to evaluate the DMFT score, dental plaque weight, dental plaque index, and gingival index. RESULTS: In part A, up to 91.8% of the subjects in the experimental group were satisfied with the use of the P-113-containing oral spray. In part B, based on our PacBio SMRT sequencing platform and DADA2 analysis, the numbers of Streptococcus and Porphyromonas in the experimental group were lower than those in the control group. In addition, decreased dental plaque weight, dental plaque index, and gingival index were all observed in the experimental group. CONCLUSION: The P-113-containing oral spray has the potential to reduce the dental caries and periodontal disease-related bacteria and to control the dental plaque formation.

Early childhood caries (ECC) are a prevalent chronic disease in young children. However, there has been limited research on the microbiota in different tissue levels of the same tooth in children with ECC. This study aimed to investigate the dynamic changes in bacterial diversity during the progression of Severe Early Childhood Caries (S-ECC) within the same tooth, from the tooth surface to the root canal, by collecting tissue samples from different areas of the affected tooth. METHODS: Twenty primary teeth with periapical periodontitis were selected from 20 children aged 3-5 years, with 100 samples collected from the different layers: uncavitated buccal enamel surface without white spot lesion (surface), the outermost layer of the dentin carious lesion (superficial), the inner layer of carious dentin (deep), necrotic pulp tissue (pulp), and root exudate (exudate). The taxonomy of each OTU representative sequence was analyzed against the 16S rRNA database. Comparisons of alpha diversity between groups were performed. The number of shared and unique genera between groups counted. Beta diversity was contrasted to evaluate differences in bacterial community composition, and the relationships between the microbiota and samples were analyzed. The heatmap analysis of the 30 most abundant genera was used, which highlighted their relative distribution and abundance. The significantly abundant taxa (phylum to genera) of bacteria among the different groups were identified. The differences of relative abundance between bacterial genera among the five groups were analyzed. Significant Spearman correlations were noted, and visualization of the co-occurrence network was conducted. RESULTS: Bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed that most genera were present in all layers, with the number of shared genera increasing as the disease advanced. The bacterial communities and core genera in the co-occurrence network changed with progression to severe ECC. CONCLUSION: An increase in both the quantity and complexity of bacterial interactions was observed. This study emphasized the importance of paying attention to the relationship between microbial species rather than just checking changes in bacterial species structure when investigating the role of bacteria in disease progression.

54 studies were included (43 cross-sectional; 11 cohort) comprising more than 3486 participants (at least 1666 CF and 1820 CA) whose saliva and/or dental plaque were used as clinical samples. Methodological quality was graded as "fair" for most of the studies. The abundance of 87 bacterial and 44 fungal genera were statistically different among CF and CA individuals. Atopobium spp., Capnocytophaga spp., Lactobacillus spp., Prevotella spp., Scardovia spp., Selenomonas spp. among others were frequently reported as being more abundant in CA individuals. Several functional patterns, such as lipids, carbohydrate, starch, sucrose, amino sugar metabolisms, among others, were identified as being specifically related to CF or to CA conditions. CONCLUSION: In spite of the variability among the included studies and of the predominance of qualitative synthesis, groups of microorganisms as well as specific functional profiles coded by the assessed microbiota are differently abundant among caries-affected and caries-free individuals. These results need to be interpreted with caution considering the limitations inherent to each assessed primary study.

Analysis of the obtained data revealed 31 KEGG IDs corresponding to enzymes involved in the conversion of primary metabolites into acids. All 117 identified genera from the contig analysis were found to be part of the oral microbiome. In addition, A higher prevalence of acid-producing bacteria was noted in dental caries samples compared to earlier reports. CONCLUSION: The study indicates the significant role of acid-producing bacteria in the initiation and progression of dental caries. The findings highlight the importance of microbial activity in the demineralization process of tooth enamel. Methods for preventing dental decay may be promising if specific measures are implemented to reduce the amount of acid produced by oral bacteria.

A questionnaire survey was conducted to assess oral health behaviours and dental plaque samples were collected from 96 Zhuang and Han children aged 4-5 years living in Guangxi, southern China for high-throughput sequencing. PCR amplification was performed for sequencing of the V4 region of the 16S rDNA gene, and second-generation sequencing was performed using the Illumina MiSeq platform to compare and analyse the diversity, structure and function of the microbiota. RESULTS: Single-factor analysis revealed significant differences between the Zhuang and Han ethnic groups regarding juice consumption, the frequency of consuming sugar-sweetened food or beverages before bedtime, the age that individuals started toothbrushing, the frequency of toothbrushing and the frequency of parental assistance with toothbrushing (p < 0.001). The dominant phyla were Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, etc., and the dominant genera included Streptococcus and Neisseria. The dental plaques of the caries-free Zhuang and Han ethnic groups had similar core microbiomes, with no significant differences in the diversity and structure of the microbiota and no significant differences in the abundance of the dominant genera. In addition, no significant difference in metabolic function was observed between the Zhuang and Han ethnic groups. CONCLUSION: The core oral microbiota was consistent in caries-free Zhuang and Han children. Despite differences in dietary habits and oral hygiene behaviours between the Zhuang and Han ethnic groups, with a high frequency of sugary food intake but better oral health behaviours in the Zhuang group, there were no significant differences in the diversity, structure and function of the oral microbiota of caries-free children in the Zhuang and Han ethnic groups.

In the study, cariogenic biofilms were grown with L. rhamnosus (LGG) or L. rhamnosus ATCC 7469 and analyzed. Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR), Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), and Confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) were used to detect the changes in the composition and architectures; cariogenic activity was measured by the lactic acid production and Transverse Microradiography (TMR). The effects of LGG on the 12 Sprague-Dawley rat caries model were assessed using Keyes scores and micro-CT analysis. Oral microbiome changes were evaluated through 16S rRNA gene high-throughput sequencing. RESULTS: L. rhamnosus can reduce cariogenic bacteria in biofilm by 14.7 % to 48.9 %, with LGG exhibiting more potent inhibitory effects. Both strains of L. rhamnosus can adhere to the surface of biofilms, reduce the extracellular polysaccharides (EPS) matrix, and loosen the biofilm structure. L. rhamnosus inhibited cariogenic activity by reducing the lactic acid production in biofilms. The bovine enamel blocks presented lower mineral loss values and lesion depth values in the group Core+L.rh and Core+LGG. LGG-ingested rats had significantly lower levels of moderate dentin lesions and higher mineral density than the control group. The 16 s rRNA gene sequencing revealed that LGG regulated the beta diversity of the oral microbial community in the rat dental caries model. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed the promising potential of L. rhamnosus, especially the LGG strain, in the ecological prevention of dental caries. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Probiotics may provide a strategy for preventing caries by regulating the oral microecological balance. The study revealed the promising anti-caries potential of the LGG probiotic strain in vivo and in vitro. It is expected that LGG could be used as an oral probiotic for the clinical prevention and treatment of caries.

This study aimed to engineer and optimise a dysbiotic biofilm model to develop in vitro root caries for investigating microbial modulation strategies. The model involved growing complex biofilms from a saliva inoculum collected from four volunteers using two strategies. In the first strategy ("pre-treatment strategy"), bovine root slabs were used, and two natural compounds were incorporated at time 0 of the 10-day biofilm experiment, which included sucrose cycles mimicking the cariogenic environment. In the second strategy ("post-treatment strategy"), mature biofilms were grown in a modified Calgary biofilm device coated with collagen and hydroxyapatite for 7 days and then were exposed to the same natural compounds. The metatranscriptome of each biofilm was then determined and analysed. Collagenase activity was examined, and the biofilms and dentine were imaged using confocal and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Mineral loss and lesion formation were confirmed through micro-computed tomography (μ-CT). RESULTS: The pH confirmed the cariogenic condition. In the metatranscriptome, we achieved a biofilm compositional complexity, showing a great diversity of the metabolically active microbiome in both pre- and post-treatment strategies, including reads mapped to microorganisms other than bacteria, such as archaea and viruses. Carbohydrate esterases had increased expression in the post-treated biofilms and in samples without sugar cycles, while glucosyltransferases were highly expressed in the presence of sucrose cycles. Enrichment for functions related to nitrogen compound metabolism and organic cyclic component metabolism in groups without sucrose compared to the sucrose-treated group. Pre-treatment of the roots with cranberry reduced microbial viability and gelatinase (but not collagenase) activity (p < 0.05). SEM images showed the complexity of biofilms was maintained, with a thick extracellular polysaccharides layer. CONCLUSIONS: This root caries model was optimized to produce complex cariogenic biofilms and root caries-like lesions, and could be used to test microbial modulation in vitro. Pre-treatments before biofilm development and cariogenic challenges were more effective than post-treatments. The clinical significance lies in the potential to apply the findings to develop varnish products for post-professional tooth prophylaxis, aiming at implementing a strategy for dysbiosis reversal in translational research. Video Abstract.

The global rise in the elderly population has increased the prevalence of root caries. Streptococcus mutans, Lactobacilli and Actinomyces are considered the primary pathogens of dental caries in culture-based studies. This study aimed to investigate bacterial profiles in coronal and root caries lesions and determine the association of specific bacterial genera at each site. METHODS: Dentine samples from carious lesions were collected from 22 extracted teeth using an excavator. Microbial DNA was extracted from the samples using a protocol developed for this study. 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing was employed for microbial analysis. PCR amplification targeted the V3-V4 region of the bacterial 16S rRNA, and the amplicon sequencing used an Illumina MiSeq system (2 × 300 bp paired-end reads). Statistical analysis was performed by the Phyloseq and DESeq2 packages in R. RESULTS: In coronal caries, Olsenella, Lactobacillus and Prevotella were the most prevalent genera, comprising approximately 70% of the microbiome community. In the root caries, however, although Olsenella, Prevotella and Lactobacillus remained the dominant genera, they accounted for only half of the microbiome community. This study identified significant differences in alpha diversity indices between the coronal and root caries. LEfSE analysis revealed several unique genera in each caries lesion. CONCLUSION: The microbiome of root caries lesions was richer and more complex than the coronal caries microbiota. The results suggest that lesion-related variations in the oral microflora may be detected in carious dentine.

An open literature search was conducted by using PubMed (MEDLINE), Cochrane Library and Google Scholar. The most studied age range was 9 to 12 years, with groups of children with no caries and groups with a minimum number of two teeth that were reconstructed, decayed and/or missing (DMFS/dmfs > 2) who experienced different tongue hygiene methods for the first time. RESULTS: Four randomized trials met the search criteria and were included in this review. CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained suggest that specific tongue hygiene protocols, combined with a healthy diet and lifestyle, could be considered the gold standard to enable more effective primary prevention and improve the health of pediatric patients. This review improves the understanding of the impact of tongue hygiene in controlling the bacteria responsible for the onset of carious disease and its systemic correlates; however, further research with more data is needed to further confirm the findings of this research.

Preand probiotics may help restore a dysbiotic oral ecosystem. The first years of life provide a window of opportunity to modulate the composition of the oral microbiota and prevent disease. OBJECTIVES: The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of a tablet containing inactivated Ligilactobacillus salivarius CECT 5317 and the cranberry extract on the development of caries in cariesactive preschool children. MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study employed a randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind design. Preschool children (N = 73) with at least one active carious lesion were enrolled and randomly assigned to the test group or the placebo group. The intervention period was 3 months. Caries was assessed according to the International Caries Detection and Assessment System (ICDAS) II criteria at baseline and after 9 months, and oral hygiene was evaluated with the simplified oral hygiene index (OHI-S). The salivary counts of Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus spp. were determined at baseline, and then after 3 and 9 months through the conventional cultivation on TYCSB and MRS agar, respectively. RESULTS: Sixty children completed the trial (a dropout rate of 19%). The baseline caries prevalence was high in both groups (~71%) and there were no major differences between the groups with regard to background variables. The 9-month incidence of initial carious lesions (ICDAS 1+2) was significantly lower in the test group as compared to the placebo group (p < 0.05). The plaque levels, and the salivary counts of S. mutans and Lactobacillus spp. remained unchanged in both groups throughout the study. CONCLUSIONS: A daily intake of a tablet containing a paraprobiotic and the cranberry extract reduced the 9-month incidence of initial non-cavitated carious lesions in caries-active preschool children. The present study is one of the first to show the impact of synbiotics on the development of caries in children.

We analyzed the oral metagenome of 20 patients who applied a 0.2% CHX mouthwash twice daily for 4 weeks following periodontal surgical procedures. Saliva and supragingival plaque samples were examined before, directly after 4 weeks, and another 4 weeks after discontinuing the CHX treatment. RESULTS: Alpha-diversity decreased significantly with CHX use. The Bray-Curtis dissimilarity increased in both sample sites and mainly streptococci showed a higher relative abundance after CHX treatment. Although no significant changes of ARGs could be detected, an increase in prevalence was found for genes that encode for tetracycline efflux pumps. CONCLUSION: CHX treatment appears to promote a caries-associated bacterial community and the emergence of tetracycline resistance genes. Future research should focus on CHX-related changes in the microbial community and whether the discovered tetracycline resistance genes promote resistance to CHX.

Treatment with CaneCPI-5 increased several proteins with antimicrobial, acid-resistance, affinity for hydroxyapatite, structural and calcium binding properties, such as Cysteine-rich-3 (6-fold-p = 0.03), Cystatin-B (5.5-fold-p < 0.01), Neutrophil-defensin 1 (4.7-fold-p < 0.01), Mucin (3.9-fold-p < 0.01), Immunoglobulin-heavy-constant (3.8-fold-p < 0.01) and Lactotransferrin (2.8-fold-p < 0.01). Microbiome revealed that several commensal bacteria had their abundance increased after rinsing with CaneCPI-5, such as Corynebacterium and Neisseria, while Streptococcus and Prevotella nigrescens were decreased. The results indicate the efficiency of CaneCPI-5 in promoting beneficial changes in the AEP and biofilm, making this phytocystatin a potential target for incorporation into dental products. CONCLUSION: Cane demonstrated the capability to alter the protein composition of the acquired enamel pellicle (AEP) and the initial colonizers of the biofilm, enhancing the presence of proteins and bacteria crucial for dental protection.

Supragingival dental plaque samples were collected, using a sterile swab, (COPAN FLOQswab™) swabbed onto Whatman FTA™ cards. DNA extraction was performed using a modified Powersoil™ protocol. Where published assays were unsuitable, species-specific qPCR assays for caries-associated, gingivitis-associated and oral-health-associated bacteria were designed using multiple sequence alignment, Primer3Plus and PrimerQuest. Assays were run using absolute quantification. Limit of detection (LOD) and limit of quantification (LOQ) were calculated, and PCR products verified by Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: Most assays allowed detection using real-time qPCR with high specificity on samples collected on FTA cards. Several assays showed low or even single gene copy numbers on the test samples. CONCLUSION: Assays were optimised for detection and evaluation of oral health risk in dental plaque samples stored on FTA cards when cold storage is not feasible, except for F. nucleatum. Several assays showed gene copy numbers less than the LOQ or outside the range of the standard curve, so there is merit in optimising these assays using digital droplet PCR.

The Joanna Briggs Institute and Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Scoping Reviews guidelines were utilized to prepare the review. Four databases and eight gray literature sources were searched for English publications across any geographical location or setting. RESULTS: Two hundred and seventy-five sources were included, predominantly from scientific journals and academic settings. Most studies originated from North America. Research primarily involved adults, with limited studies in children and adolescents. Oral irrigation was safe and well-accepted when used appropriately. It reduced periodontal inflammation, potentially by modulating the oral microbiota, but further research needs to clarify its mechanism of action. Promising results were reported in populations with dental implants and special needs. Patient acceptance appeared high, but standardized patient-reported outcome measures were rarely used. Anti-inflammatory benefits occurred consistently across populations and irrigant solutions. Plaque reduction findings were mixed, potentially reflecting differences in study designs and devices. CONCLUSIONS: Oral irrigators reduce periodontal inflammation, but their impact on plaque removal remains unclear. Well-designed, sufficiently powered trials of appropriate duration need to assess the clinical, microbiological, and inflammatory responses of the periodontium to oral irrigation, particularly those with periodontitis, dental implants, and special needs. Patient-reported outcome measures, costs, caries prevention, and environmental impact of oral irrigation need to be compared to other oral hygiene aids.

The status of dental caries is closely related to changes in the oral microbiome. In this study, we compared the diversity and structure of the dental plaque microbiome in children with severe early childhood caries (S-ECC) before and after general anaesthesia and outpatient treatment. METHODS: Forty children aged 3 to 5 years with S-ECC who had completed whole-mouth dental treatment under general anaesthesia (C1) or in outpatient settings (C2) were selected, 20 in each group. The basic information and oral health status of the children were recorded, and the microbial community structure and diversity of dental plaque before treatment (C1, C2), the day after treatment(C2_0D), 7 days after treatment (C1_7D, C2_7D), 1 month after treatment (C1_1M, C2_1M), and 3 months after treatment (C1_3M, C2_3M) were analysed via 16 S rRNA high-throughput sequencing technology. RESULTS: (1) The alpha diversity test showed that the flora richness in the multiappointment group was significantly greater at posttreatment than at pretreatment (P < 0.05), and the remaining alpha diversity index did not significantly differ between the 2 groups (P > 0.05). The beta diversity analysis revealed that the flora structures of the C1_7D group and the C2_3M group were significantly different from those of the other time points within the respective groups (P < 0.05). (2) The core flora existed in both the pre- and posttreatment groups, and the proportion of their flora abundance could be altered depending on the caries status of the children in both groups. Leptotrichia abundance was significantly (P < 0.05) lower at 7 days posttreatment in both the single- and multiappointment groups. Corynebacterium and Corynebacterium_matruchotii were significantly more abundant in the C1_1M and C1_3M groups than in the C1 and C1_7D groups (P < 0.05). Streptococcus, Haemophilus and Haemophilus_parainfluenzae were significantly more abundant in the C1_7D group than in the other groups (P < 0.05). CONCLUSION: A single session of treatment under general anaesthesia can cause dramatic changes in the microbial community structure and composition within 7 days after treatment, whereas treatment over multiple appointments may cause slow changes in oral flora diversity.

Since most of the commonly known oral diseases are explained in link with balance of microbial community, an accurate bacterial taxonomy profiling for determining bacterial compositional network is essential. However, compared to intestinal microbiome, research data pool related to oral microbiome is small, and general 16S rRNA screening method has a taxonomy misclassification issue in confirming complex bacterial composition at the species level. OBJECTIVE: Present study aimed to explore bacterial compositional networks at the species level within saliva of 39 oral disease patients (Dental Caries group: n = 26 and Periodontitis group: n = 13) through comparison with public Korean-specific healthy oral microbiome data. METHODS: Here, we applied comprehensive molecular diagnostics based on qRT-PCR and Sanger sequencing methods to complement the technical limitations of NGS-based 16S V3-V4 amplicon sequencing technology. RESULTS: As a result of microbiome profiling at the genus level, relative frequencies of many nitrate-reducing bacteria within each oral disease group were found to be significantly low compared to the healthy group. In addition, the molecular diagnostics-based bacterial identification method allowed the determination of the correct taxonomy of screened primary colonizers (Streptococcus and Actinomyces unclassification clusters) for each oral disease. Finally, as with the results of microbiome profiling at the genus level, many core-species classified within the saliva of each oral disease group were also related to nitrate-reduction, and it was estimated that various pathogens associated with each disease formed a bacterial network with the core-species. CONCLUSION: Our study introduced a novel approach that can compensate for the difficulty of identifying an accurate bacterial compositional network at the species level due to unclear taxonomy classification by using the convergent approach of NGS-molecular diagnostics. Ultimately, we suggest that our experimental approach and results could be potential reference materials for researchers who intend to prevent oral disease by determining the correlation between oral health and bacterial compositional network according to the changes in the relative frequency for nitrate-reducing species.

Microbiomes are essential components of the human body, and their populations are substantial. Under normal circumstances, microbiomes coexist harmoniously with the human body, but disturbances in this equilibrium can lead to various diseases. The oral microbiome is involved in the occurrence and development of many oral and gastrointestinal diseases. This review focuses on the relationship between oral microbiomes and oral and upper gastrointestinal diseases, and therapeutic strategies aiming to provide valuable insights for clinical prevention and treatment. METHODS: To identify relevant studies, we conducted searches in PubMed, Google Scholar, and Web of Science using keywords such as "oral microbiome," "oral flora, " "gastrointestinal disease, " without any date restrictions. Subsequently, the retrieved publications were subject to a narrative review. RESULTS: In this review, we found that oral microbiomes are closely related to oral and gastrointestinal diseases such as periodontitis, dental caries, reflux esophagitis, gastritis, and upper gastrointestinal tumors (mainly the malignant ones). Oral samples like saliva and buccal mucosa are not only easy to collect, but also display superior sample stability compared to gastrointestinal tissues. Consequently, analysis of the oral microbiome could potentially serve as an efficient preliminary screening method for high-risk groups before undergoing endoscopic examination. Besides, treatments based on the oral microbiomes could aid early diagnosis and treatment of these diseases. CONCLUSIONS: Oral microbiomes are essential to oral and gastrointestinal diseases. Therapies centered on the oral microbiomes could facilitate the early detection and management of these conditions.

This trial with two parallel arms included 24 healthy adults allocated to the Active (n = 12) or Placebo (n = 12) group. Subjects consumed one lozenge three times daily for seven days, and no oral hygiene procedures were allowed. Differences in de novo plaque accumulation between a baseline period, and one and seven days of intervention were assessed by the Turesky-modification of the Quigley-and-Hein-Plaque-Index (TM-QHPI). The development of gingivitis after seven days of intervention was assessed by the Gingival Index (GI). Plaque and saliva samples were collected at baseline and after seven days of intervention, and evaluated by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: All subjects completed the study, and no adverse events were reported. After one day, the average TM-QHPI was significantly lower in the Active than in the Placebo group, as compared to baseline (p = 0.012). After 7 days, average TM-QHPI values did not differ significantly between groups (p = 0.37). GI values did not increase during the intervention period, with no difference between groups (p = 0.62). Bacterial richness increased in both plaque and saliva samples over a seven-day oral hygiene-free period, with a statistically significant difference for the saliva samples (p = 0.0495) between groups. CONCLUSIONS: A multiple-enzymes lozenge decreased the build-up of de novo plaque after one day and slowed down the process of species increment in saliva. The lozenge may be an adjunct to regular mechanical plaque removal. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Dental plaque is the main cause of caries, gingivitis, and periodontitis. The search for therapeutic adjuncts to mechanical plaque removal that have no harmful effects on the oral microbiome is important. Treatment with multiple plaque-matrix degrading enzymes is a promising non-biocidal approach to plaque control.

Unstimulated saliva (2 mL) was collected from 20 children with and without S-ECC for metagenomics analysis. Metagenomics sequencing and bioinformatic analysis were performed to determine the two groups' phageome diversity, taxonomic and functional annotations. Statistical analysis and visualization were performed with R and SPSS Statistics software. RESULTS: 85.7 % of the extracted viral sequences were predicted from phages, in which most phages were classified into Myoviridae, Siphoviridae, and Podoviridae. Alpha diversity decreased, and Beta diversity increased in the S-ECC phageome compared to the healthy group. The abundance of Podoviridae phages increased, and the abundance of Inoviridae, Herelleviridae, and Streptococcus phages decreased in the S-ECC group. Functional annotation revealed increased annotation on glycoside hydrolases and nucleotide metabolism, decreased glycosyl transferases, carbohydrate-binding modules, and biogenic metabolism in the S-ECC phageome. CONCLUSIONS: Metagenomic analysis revealed reduced Streptococcus phages and significant changes in functional annotations within the S-ECC phageome. These findings suggest a potential weakening of the regulatory influence of oral bacteria, which may indicate the development of innovative prevention and treatment strategies for S-ECC. These implications deserve further investigation and hold promise for advancing our understanding and management of S-ECC. CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE: The findings of this study indicate that oral phageomes are associated with bacterial genomes and metabolic processes, affecting the development of S-ECC. The reduced modulatory effect of the oral phageome in counteracting S-ECC's cariogenic activity suggests a new avenue for the prevention and treatment of S-ECC.

We recruited a total of 87 subjects and collected dental plaque samples from AC adolescents (AAP), post-operative ABG adolescents (PAP), healthy control adolescents (CAP), AC young adults (AYP), post-operative ABG young adults (PYP), and healthy control young adults (CYP). The sequencing of 16S rRNA genes was performed. RESULTS: The microbial composition of plaque from alveolar cleft patients differed significantly from age-matched healthy controls. Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis revealed that AAP was enriched for Neisseria, Haemophilus, Fusobacterium, Rhodococcus, Aggregatibacter, Gemella, and Porphyromonas, whereas AYP was enriched for Capnocytophaga, Rhodococcus, and Actinomyces-f0332. There were phenotypic differences in facultatively anaerobic, Gram-negative, Gram-positive, and oxidative stress tolerance between the AYP group with longer alveolar cleft and the healthy control group according to Bugbase phenotypic predictions. Alveolar bone grafting did not alter the functional phenotype of alveolar cleft patients but reduced the number of differential genera between alveolar cleft patients and healthy controls at both ages. CONCLUSIONS: Our study systematically characterized the supragingival plaque microbiota of alveolar cleft patients, post-alveolar bone grafting patients, and matched healthy controls in two ages to gain a better understanding of plaque ecology and microbiology associated with alveolar clefts.

Thirty-seven C and 46 AA aged from 5 to 25 years were evaluated regarding periodontal disease, caries, microbial subgingival profile via 16-s sequencing, as well as salivary and gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) inflammatory profile via multiplex assay. RESULTS: Greater probing depth percentage was detected in AA (p = .0075), while a higher percentage of caries index (p = .0069) and decayed, missing, filled teeth (DMFT) index (p = .0089) was observed in C, after adjusting for number of teeth, sex and age. Salivary levels of IL-6, IL-8 and TNFα were higher for C, whereas GCF levels of eotaxin, IL-12p40, IL-12p70, IL-2 and MIP-1α were higher in AA (p < .05). Different microbial profiles were observed between the races (p = .02). AA presented higher abundance of periodontopathogens (such as Tanerella forsythia, Treponema denticola, Filifactor alocis, among others), and C presented more caries-associated bacteria (such as Streptococcus mutans and Prevotella species). Bacillaceae and Lactobacillus species were associated with higher DMFT index, whereas Fusobacterium and Tanerella species with periodontal disease parameters. CONCLUSIONS: A different inflammatory and bacterial profile was observed between healthy AA and C, which may predispose these races to higher susceptibility to specific oral diseases.

72 individuals were divided into CC patients (n=36) and healthy individuals (control group - CT n=36). Demographic data, hygiene habits, frequency of sugar intake, CC type, and AT were collected. Stimulated salivary flow rate was measured and the presence and concentration of Streptococcus mutans were assessed using a real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) technique. Clinical evaluations included plaque index (PI) and decayed-missing-filled-teeth index (dmft/DMFT). Descriptive statistics, T-test, Mann-Whitney test, chi-square test, Fisher's exact test, and two-way analysis of variance were used for data analysis (p<0.05). RESULTS: At the time of oral evaluation, both groups exhibited similar ages with means of 12.0±3.9 years old for CC and 12.0±4.0 years old for CT patients. All CC patients underwent chemotherapy with nine also undergoing radiotherapy. Significant differences were observed between the groups in terms of color/race, income, family education, and hygiene habits. However, no statistically significant differences were found between groups regarding the frequency of sugar intake, stimulated salivary flow rate, or the concentration of Streptococcus mutans (qPCR technique). For clinical parameters, the DMF (CC:1.80, CT: 0.75), decayed (CC: 0.88, CT: 0.19), missing (CC: 0.25, CT:0), and PI (CC: 30.5%, CT: 22.6%) were higher in the CC group (p<0.05). CONCLUSION: Childhood cancer (CC) patients undergoing antineoplastic therapy (AT) exhibit a higher prevalence of dental caries, regardless of income/education, frequency of sugar intake, stimulated salivary flow rate, and microbiota.

In vivo study, 10 participants rinsed (10mL,1 min) with either deionized water (H2O-control) or Comb. AEP and biofilm were collected after 2 and 3 h, respectively, after rinsing. AEP samples underwent proteomics analysis, while biofilm microbiome was assessed via 16 S-rRNA Next Generation Sequencing(NGS). In vitro study, a microcosm biofilm protocol was employed. Ninety-six enamel specimens were treated with: 1)Phosphate-Buffered Solution-PBS(negative-control), 2)0.12%Chlorhexidine, 3)500ppmNaF and 4)Comb. Resazurin, colony-forming-units(CFU) and Transversal Microradiography(TMR) were performed. RESULTS: The proteomic results revealed higher quantity of proteins in the Comb compared to control associated with immune system response and oral microbial adhesion. Microbiome showed a significant increase in bacteria linked to a healthy microbiota, in the Comb group. In the in vitro study, Comb group was only efficient in reducing mineral-loss and lesion-depth compared to the PBS. CONCLUSIONS: The AEP modification altered the subsequent layers, affecting the initial process of bacterial adhesion of pathogenic and commensal bacteria, as well as enamel demineralization. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Comb group shows promise in shaping oral health by potentially introducing innovative approaches to prevent enamel demineralization and deter tooth decay.

Thirty-five pSS patients and 20 healthy controls were enrolled in this study. We collected saliva and plaque samples from pSS patients and saliva samples from healthy controls. We used 16S ribosomal DNA (16S rDNA) high-throughput sequencing targeting the V3-V4 hypervariable region to determine the composition and structure of the microbiota in the three sample sets. Finally, bioinformatics analyses, including the diversity of the microbiota, species differences, and functional prediction were performed. RESULTS: In the alpha diversity and beta diversity analysis, the Chao1 (P < 0.01), observed species (P < 0.01), and PD whole tree indices (P < 0.01) were significantly lower in the saliva and plaque samples of pSS patients than in the saliva samples of healthy controls, but the Shannon (P < 0.01) and Simpson indices (P < 0.01) were significantly higher in the healthy controls, and their total diversity significantly differed. In the main flora composition at the genus level (top 10), we identified Prevotella and Veillonella as more enriched in the saliva of pSS patients and Fusobacterium, Actinomyces, and Leptotrichia as more enriched in the plaque of pSS patients. Predictive functional analysis showed that the oral microbiota of pSS patients was related to translation, metabolism of cofactors and vitamins, and nucleotide metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: The oral microbial ecology of patients with pSS is dysregulated, resulting in a decrease in overall diversity. Prevotella and Veillonella may be related to pSS, while Fusobacterium, Actinomyces, and Leptotrichia may be related to dental caries in pSS patients. Key Points • This study revealed differences in the oral microbial composition of patients with pSS compared to healthy controls. • We included a plaque group of pSS patients to identify the microbiota related to pSS and dental caries. • Prevotella and Veillonella may contribute to pSS, and Fusobacterium, Actinomyces, and Leptotrichia are associated with dental caries in pSS patients.

A systematic review of the literature was carried out. Five databases were consulted, including publications in English, Spanish and Portuguese. The evaluations of the quality of the observational studies and the experimental studies were carried out with the Newcastle-Ottawa scale and CONSORT guidelines, respectively. The risk of bias of the studies was determined using Rev Manager 5.4, and 5 publications were meta-analyzed. RESULTS: The cariogenic microbiota of children and adolescents with cleft lip and palate was similar to that of children without clefts, although with higher counts of Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus spp. The periodontopathogenic microbiota was related to the presence of Campylobacter spp, Fusobacterium spp, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Prevotella intermedia/nigrescens, Parvimonas micra and Porphyromonas gingivalis, considered microorganisms with high pathogenic capacity. Heterogeneity was shown in relation to the microbiota and the type of fissure, presenting numerous microorganisms associated with the pre- and post-surgical condition (cheilorrhaphy and palatorrhaphy) such as Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus beta hemolyticus, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Klebsiella oxytoca, Moraxella catarrhalis, Candida spp, Candida albicans, Candida krusei and Candida tropicalis. The meta-analysis revealed that patients with cleft lip and palate were 2.03 times more likely to have caries than the control group (p<0.005). CONCLUSION: In the microbiota, there was a great diversity of microorganisms that can vary according to the type of fissure and surgical interventions predisposing patients to a greater probability of dental caries, it is important to take into account the technique used to describe the oral microbiota in order to be able to compare the different studies. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Studying the microbiota and the relationship of dental caries and periodontal status in children and adolescents with cleft lip and palate can facilitate the comprehensive care of patients with these conditions.

Sixty human salivary and supragingival plaque samples were collected. They were characterized into four groups: patients with rampant caries with Sjogren's syndrome (RC-SS) or high-sugar diet (RC-HD), common dental caries (DC), and healthy individuals (HP). The 16S rRNA V3-V4 region of the bacterial DNA was detected by Illumina sequencing. PCoA based on OTU with Bray-Curtis algorithm, the abundance of each level, LEfSe analysis, network analysis, and PICRUSt analysis were carried out between the four groups and two sample types. Clinical and demographic data were compared using analysis of variance (ANOVA) or the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis rank-sum test, depending on the normality of the data, using GraphPad Prism 8 (P < 0.05). RESULTS: OTU principal component analysis revealed a significant difference between healthy individuals and those with RC-SS. In the saliva of patients with rampant caries, the relative abundance of Firmicutes increased significantly at the phylum level. Further, Streptocpccus, Veillonella, Prevotella, and Dialister increased, while Neisseria and Haemophilus decreased at the genus level. Veillonella increased in the plaque samples of patients with rampant caries. CONCLUSION: Both salivary and dental plaque composition were significantly different between healthy individuals and patients with rampant caries. This study provides a microbiological basis for exploring the etiology of rampant caries. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: This study provides basic information on the flora of the oral cavity in adults with rampant caries in China. These findings could serve as a reference for the treatment of this disease.

The oral microbiome is a complex and dynamic assemblage of microorganisms that colonize different sites of the oral cavity maintaining both oral and systemic health. Therefore, when its composition is altered, oral diseases occur. Among oral inflammatory pathologies, periodontal diseases affect the tissues surrounding the teeth, representing the main cause of tooth loss and one of the most important threats to the oral health. Lifestyle and eating habits influence the composition of the human oral microbiota and the development and progression of oral diseases. In this context, the Mediterranean Diet (MD) model, comprising both healthy dietary choices and lifestyle, is linked to the prevention of several metabolic and chronic-degenerative pathological processes, including oral diseases. Indeed, the MD is a plant-based diet, enriched of anti-inflammatory and antioxidant nutrients, which may induce beneficial effects against dental caries and periodontal diseases. AIM: This review summarizes the role of the oral microbiome in the development of the oral diseases and the potential of MD in modulating the oral microbiome leading to implications for oral health. CONCLUSIONS: The data collected highlight the need to promote the MD pattern along with the correct hygiene habits to prevent the development of oral diseases.

In total, 3935 records were reviewed which resulted in a selection of 20 cross-sectional studies (published 2005-2022) with a sample size ranging from 11 to 614 participants including adolescents between 11 and 19 years. The studies analyzed saliva, dental biofilm or tongue swabs with Checkerboard DNA-DNA hybridization, (q)PCR or Next-Generation Sequencing methods. Prevotella denticola, Scardoviae Wiggsiae, Streptococcus sobrinus and Streptococcus mutans were the most frequently reported species presenting higher abundance in adolescents with caries. The majority of the studies reported that the microbial diversity was similar between participants with and without dental caries. CONCLUSION: This systematic review is the first that shows how the oral microbiota composition in adolescents appears to differ between those with and without dental caries, suggesting certain taxa may be associated with increased caries risk. However, there is a need to replicate and expand these findings in larger, longitudinal studies that also focus on caries severity and take adolescent-specific factors into account.

The dental plaque microbiomes of 30 patients with oral diseases (10 each with caries, periodontitis, and comorbid diseases) were sequenced and analysed using 16 S rRNA gene sequencing. The Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used for a differential functional analysis of dental plaque microbial communities in caries, periodontitis, and comorbid diseases. RESULTS: The coinfection group had the greatest bacterial richness in dental plaque. The principal coordinate analysis showed that caries and periodontitis were separate from each other, and comorbid diseases were located at the overlap of caries and periodontitis, with most of them being periodontitis. Simultaneously, we compared the microbiomes with significant differences among the three groups and the correlations between the microbiome samples. In addition, KEGG pathway analysis revealed significant differences in functional changes among the three groups. CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed the composition of the dental plaque microbial communities in caries, periodontitis, and comorbidities and the differences among the three. Additionally, we identified a possible antagonism between periodontitis and caries. We identified a new treatment strategy for the prediction and diagnosis of caries and periodontitis.

Children affected by severe early childhood caries (S-ECC) usually need comprehensive caries treatment due to the extensive of caries. How the oral microbiome changes after caries therapy within the short-term warrant further study. AIM: This study aimed to investigate the short-term impact of comprehensive caries treatment on the supragingival plaque microbiome of S-ECC children. DESIGN: Thirty-three children aged 2-4 years with severe caries (dt > 7) were recruited. Comprehensive caries treatment was performed under general anesthesia in one session and included restoration, pulp treatment, extraction, and fluoride application. Supragingival plaque was sampled pre- and 1-month posttreatment. The genomic DNA of the supragingival plaque was extracted, and bacterial 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing was performed. RESULTS: Our data showed that the microbial community evenness significantly decreased posttreatment. Furthermore, comprehensive caries treatment led to more diverse microbial structures among the subjects. The interbacterial interactions reflected by the microbial community's co-occurrence network tended to be less complex posttreatment. Caries treatment increased the relative abundance of Corynebacterium matruchotii, Corynebacterium durum, Actinomyces naeslundii, and Saccharibacteria HMT-347, as well as Aggregatibacter HMT-458 and Haemophilus influenzae. Meanwhile, the relative abundance of Streptococcus mutans, three species from Leptotrichia, Neisseria bacilliformis, and Provotella pallens significantly decreased posttreatment. CONCLUSION: Our results suggested that comprehensive caries treatment may contribute to the reconstruction of a healthier supragingival microbiome.

Here we report the first case of descending necrotizing mediastinitis in a patient with a retropharyngeal abscess, in the absence of dental diseases.

Saliva, an oral secretion is considered an essential biological modulator involved in maintaining oral homeostasis. Increased glucose levels in diabetic patients' saliva may have an impact on diversity of microbes. Comparing the salivary microflora of diabetic and non-diabetic cohorts will help in diagnosis and risk assessment of oral health complications. This will provide greater knowledge about the contribution of oral microbes to the development of oral illnesses. The association between salivary microbiota and diabetic state is less explored in the North Indian population, hence current observational study was performed to analyze the salivary microflora of diabetic and non-diabetic individuals using metagenomic analysis. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This single-center non-randomized observational trial was conducted in Uttar Pradesh, India. Participants were enrolled into either diabetic (n = 68) or non-diabetic groups (n = 68) based on their diabetes status. Following saliva collection, DNA was extracted and metagenomic sequencing was performed. RESULTS: Phylum Bacteroidetes and Fusobacteria were significantly abundant in diabetic individuals (p < 0.0001), while Proteobacteria was significantly higher among non-diabetic individuals (p < 0.0001). No statistical difference in phylum Actinobacteria and Firmicutes among diabetics and non-diabetics. Veillonella, Prevotella, Porphyromonas, Leptotrichia, Lactobacillus, and Streptococcus were greater in diabetics whereas the abundance of Capnocytophaga and Neisseria was more among non-diabetics (p < 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: The genera Veillonella, Prevotella, Porphyromonas, Leptotrichia, Lactobacillus, and Streptococcus were comparatively over the odds with the diabetics in India. The association between microbiota in diabetic population and risk related to increase in occurrence of caries, gingivitis, and periodontitis in diabetic population prevalence should be investigated.

The focal infection theory has been used to explain several chronic systemic diseases in the past. Systemic diseases were thought to be caused by focal infections, such as caries and periodontal diseases, and dentists were held responsible for these diseases due to the spread of oral infections. As knowledge of the interrelationship between oral microorganisms and the host immune response has evolved over the last few decades, the focal infection theory has been modified in various ways. The relationship between oral and systemic health appears to be more complex than that suggested by the classical theory of focal infections. Indeed, the contribution of the oral microbiota to some systemic diseases is gaining acceptance, as there are strong associations between periodontal disease and atherosclerotic vascular disease, diabetes, and hospital-associated pneumonia, amongst others. As many jurisdictions have various protocols for managing this oral-systemic axis of disease, we sought to provide a consensus on this notion with the help of a multidisciplinary team from the Czech Republic. METHODS: A multidisciplinary team comprising physicians/surgeons in the specialities of dentistry, ear-nose and throat (ENT), cardiology, orthopaedics, oncology, and diabetology were quetioned with regard to their conceptual understanding of the focal infection theory particularly in relation to the oral-systemic axis. The team also established a protocol to determine the strength of these associations and to plan the therapeutic steps needed to treat focal odontogenic infections whenever possible. RESULTS: Scoring algorithms were devised for odontogenic inflammatory diseases and systemic risks, and standardised procedures were developed for general use. CONCLUSIONS: The designed algorithm of the oral-systemic axis will be helpful for all health care workers in guiding their patient management protocol.

Oral microbiome sequencing has revealed key links between microbiome dysfunction and dental caries. However, these efforts have largely focused on Western populations, with few studies on the Middle Eastern communities. The current study aimed to identify the composition and abundance of the oral microbiota in saliva samples of children with different caries levels using machine learning approaches. METHODS: Oral microbiota composition and abundance were identified in 250 Saudi participants with high dental caries and 150 with low dental caries using 16 S rRNA sequencing on a NextSeq 2000 SP flow cell (Illumina, CA) using 250 bp paired-end reads, and attempted to build a classifier using random forest models to assist in the early detection of caries. RESULTS: The ADONIS test results indicate that there was no significant association between sex and Bray-Curtis dissimilarity (p ~ 0.93), but there was a significant association with dental caries status (p ~ 0.001). Using an alpha level of 0.05, five differentially abundant operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were identified between males and females as the main effect along with four differentially abundant OTUs between high and low dental caries. The mean metrics for the optimal hyperparameter combination using the model with only differentially abundant OTUs were: Accuracy (0.701); Matthew's correlation coefficient (0.0509); AUC (0.517) and F1 score (0.821) while the mean metrics for random forest model using all OTUs were:0.675; 0.054; 0.611 and 0.796 respectively. CONCLUSION: The assessment of oral microbiota samples in a representative Saudi Arabian population for high and low metrics of dental caries yields signatures of abundances and diversity.

Patients with schizophrenia constitute a particularly vulnerable group for oral diseases. Among the different factors involved, we aimed to examine the evidence of how drugs could contribute to the poorer oral health of this population. MATERIAL AND METHODS: An overview of the potential impact of medication on dental/oral health among people with schizophrenia was proposed focusing on selected literature. RESULTS: Studies show a higher dental caries and degree of periodontal diseases in this population and point to drug-induced xerostomia as an important risk factor for oral health deterioration. The risk of dry mouth depends on not only antipsychotics, but also drugs with anticholinergic activity. We hypothesize that antipsychotic induced glycaemic alterations might contribute to reduced oral health, and that the antimicrobial activity of certain antipsychotics could have an impact on oral microbiota affecting oral condition. Pharmacovigilance data show that involuntary movements are caused by typical and some atypical antipsychotics. Dry mouth is most frequently reported for quetiapine and olanzapine, while clozapine is more frequently associated with sialorrhea. CONCLUSIONS: Literature clearly shows higher caries and periodontal disease in schizophrenic patients. However, overall, there is scarce literature about the potential influence of drugs in these disorders. Health professionals should be aware of this issue in order to implement adequate preventive measures in this vulnerable population.

Despite poor oral hygiene, the Baiku Yao (BKY) ethnic group in China presents a low prevalence of dental caries, which may be related to genetic susceptibility. Due to strict intra-ethnic marriage rule, this ethnic has an advantage in studying the interaction between genetic factors and other regulatory factors related to dental caries. METHODS: Peripheral blood from a caries-free adult male was used for whole genome sequencing, and the BKY assembled genome was compared to the Han Chinese genome. Oral saliva samples were collected from 51 subjects for metabolomic and metagenomic analysis. Multiomics data were integrated for combined analysis using bioinformatics approaches. RESULTS: Comparative genomic analysis revealed the presence of structural variations in several genes associated with dental caries. Metabolomic and metagenomic sequencing demonstrated the caries-free group had significantly higher concentration of antimicrobials and higher abundance of core oral health-related microbiota. The functional analysis indicated that cationic antimicrobial peptide resistance and the lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis pathway were enriched in the caries-free group. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provided new insights into the specific regulatory mechanisms that contribute to the low prevalence of dental caries in the specific population and may provide new evidence for the genetic diagnosis and control of dental caries.

A metatranscriptomic was performed in supragingival biofilm from different clinical conditions related to caries or health. Total RNA was extracted and cDNAs were obtained and sequenced (Illumina HiSeq3000). Trimmed data (SortMeRNA) were submitted to the SqueezeMeta pipeline in the co-assembly mode for functional analysis and further differential gene expression analysis (DESeq2) and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WCGNA) to explore and identify gene modules related to these clinical conditions. RESULTS: A total of 5303 genes were found in the metatranscriptomic analysis. A co-expression network identified the most relevant modules strongly related to specific caries status. Correlation coefficients were calculated between the eigengene modules and the clinical conditions (CA, CI, and CF) discriminating multiple modules. CA and CI showed weak correlation coefficient strength across the modules, while the CF condition presented a very strong positive correlation coefficient (r = 0.9, p value = 4 × 10-9). Pearson's test was applied to further analyze the module membership and gene significance in CF conditions, and the most relevant were HSPA1s-K03283, Epr- K13277, and SLC1A-K05613. Gene Ontology (GO) shows important bioprocesses, such as two-component system, fructose and mannose metabolism, pentose and glucuronate interconversions, and flagellar assembly (p-adjust < 0.05). The ability to use different carbohydrates, integrate multiple signals, swarm, and bacteriocin production are significant metabolic advantages in the oral environment related to CF. CONCLUSIONS: A distinct functional health profile could be found in CF, where co-occurring genes can act in different pathways at the same time. Genes HSPA1s, Epr, and SLC1A may be appointed as potential biomarkers for caries-free biofilms. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Potential biomarkers for caries-free biofilms could contribute to the knowledge of caries prevention and control.

A longitudinal cohort study was conducted among 24 adolescent orthodontic patients who underwent saliva and plaque sampling and clinical examinations at time points: before fixed appliance bonding and at 1, 6, and 12 wk thereafter. Clinical indices included bleeding on probing (BOP), mean gingival index (GI), probing depths (PDs), and plaque index (PI). To study the biologically (i.e., transcriptionally) active microbial communities, RNA was extracted from plaque and saliva for RNA sequencing and microbiome bioinformatics analysis. Longitudinal changes in microbiome beta diversity were examined using PERMANOVA tests, and the relative abundance of microbial taxa was measured using Kruskal-Wallis tests, Wilcoxon rank-sum tests, and negative binomial and zero-inflated mixed models. RESULTS: Clinical measures of oral health deteriorated over time-the proportion of sites with GI and PI ≥1 increased by over 70% between prebonding and 12 wk postbonding while the proportion of sites with PD ≥4 mm increased 2.5-fold. Streptococcus sanguinis, a health-associated species that antagonizes cariogenic pathogens, showed a lasting decrease in relative abundance during orthodontic treatment. Contrarily, caries- and periodontal disease-associated taxa, including Selenomonas sputigena, Leptotrichia wadei, and Lachnoanaerobaculum saburreum, increased in abundance after bonding. Relative abundances of Stomatobaculum longum and Mogibacterium diversum in prebonding saliva predicted elevated BOP 12 wk postbonding, whereas Neisseria subflava was associated with lower BOP. CONCLUSIONS: This study offers insights into longitudinal community and species-specific changes in the supragingival microbiome transcriptome during fixed orthodontic treatment, advancing our understanding of microbial dysbioses and identifying targets of future health-promoting clinical investigations. KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER STATEMENT: Bonding braces was associated with subsequent changes in the oral microbiome characterized by increases in disease-associated species, decreases in health-associated species, and worsened clinical measures of oral health.

A comprehensive literature review was conducted on halitosis and its associated causes, including oral pathological factors, oral microbial influences, microbial metabolic pathways, gastrointestinal diseases, and gut microbiota dysbiosis. RESULTS: Unhealthy eating habits and an imbalance of microorganisms in the oral cavity and gastrointestinal tract were identified as primary causes of halitosis. Dental caries, periodontal disease, xerostomia, and digestive disorders like gastritis and irritable bowel syndrome were also found to be related to the development of halitosis. Due to poor oral hygiene or antibiotic use, disruption of microbial communities can result in dysbiosis, inflammation, and halitosis. CONCLUSIONS: Halitosis is a multifactorial condition with various underlying causes, including oral and systemic diseases. Effective interventions should be tailored based on the specific etiologies and mechanisms involved. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Understanding the factors contributing to halitosis is crucial for developing appropriate treatment strategies. Enhancing oral hygiene habits, using antimicrobial drugs, or administering probiotics may help regulate oral or intestinal flora, thereby improving halitosis and overall oral health.

Cleft in the lip and/or palate (CLP) is a congenital facial deformity that significantly impacts the oral cavity's structure and function. This malformation can affect the oral microbiota. The objective of this systematic review was to examine and consolidate the current scientific evidence on the oral microflora in children with CLP. METHODS: The search strategy included the PubMed, PubMed Central, Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase databases. The inclusion criteria were studies assessing oral microbiota in children with CLP. The Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) was used to evaluate the quality of the included studies. RESULTS: The search strategy identified 422 potential articles. Twelve papers met the inclusion criteria. High heterogeneity was observed in methodologies, sample sites, and patient characteristics. Eight studies assessed the levels of Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus in saliva, with some reporting significantly higher levels in the cleft group compared to controls, while others found no differences. One study reported a significantly higher colonization rate of Candida species in patients with cleft lip and/or palate. CONCLUSION: The results of the available studies are unclear. Further research is needed to gain a comprehensive understanding of the oral microbiota and potential implications for oral health management in this population. The review was not registered Registration Statement.

CM-EOs had better planktonic activity against C. albicans than S. mutans. All samples reduced the metabolic activity of mixed C. albicans and S. mutans biofilms, with encapsulated oils showing better activity than raw chitosan or oils. The microparticles reduced the biofilm on the slides. The essential oils showed cytotoxic effects against RAW 264.7 cells, but encapsulation into chitosan microparticles decreased their toxicity. CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that chitosan loaded with essential oils may provide an alternative method for treating diseases caused by C. albicans and S. mutans mixed biofilm, such as dental caries.

Dichloroacetate (DCA), a pan-pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitor, ameliorates multiple pathological conditions and tissue injury and shows strong potential for clinical applications. Here, we investigated the preventive effects of DCA in a murine model of alcohol-associated liver disease. METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were subjected to the acute-on-chronic model of alcohol-associated liver disease and treated with DCA. Livers were assessed in liver histology, biochemistry, and gene expression. Mass spectrometry was used to compare protein expression and metabolite levels. RESULTS: DCA inhibited hepatic expression of inflammatory genes but did not prevent steatosis and hepatocellular injury in ethanol-fed mice. Consistently, DCA repressed the expression of mRNAs for inflammatory genes in LPS-stimulated murine bone-marrow-derived macrophages and human monocytic THP-1 cells and inhibited both gene expression and protein release of interleukin-1 beta. DCA prevented hepatic accumulation of isovaleric acid in ethanol-fed mice, a short-chain fatty acid primarily produced by gut microbiota. In vitro, isovaleric acid potentiated LPS's effects, while DCA prevented this proinflammatory action. Ethanol feeding increased the expression of proteins involved in diverse metabolic pathways, including branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) degradation. In ethanol-fed mice, hepatic Fischer's ratio (the molar ratio of BCAAs to aromatic amino acids Phe and Tyr) and BTR (the molar ratio of BCAAs to Tyr) showed a decrease compared to pair-fed mice; however, this decrease was not observed in DCA-treated ethanol-fed mice. DCA blunted the ethanol-induced increase of BCKDHA, the rate-limiting enzyme in BCAA catabolism, and cytochrome P450 2E1. CONCLUSIONS: Ethanol-induced hepatic inflammatory responses and metabolic disturbances were prevented by DCA in mice, indicating the potential to develop pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitors as an effective therapy to treat alcohol-associated liver disease.

Asthma, a prevalent chronic inflammatory respiratory disease among children, was the focus of this study. Serum metabolism profiles were examined in patients diagnosed with both asthma and bronchiolitis by using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. METHODS: In this study, the serum samples from three distinct groups-comprising patients diagnosed with asthma, bronchiolitis, and a healthy control group-underwent comprehensive non-targeted metabolomics analysis and targeted eicosanoid profiling. RESULTS: Through both univariate and multivariate analyses, significant associations were observed between the pathophysiology of both asthma and bronchiolitis and aberrations in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids, amino acids, purines, and pathways involving cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases, indicative of inflammatory processes and immune responses. Furthermore, metabolic changes in phosphatidylethanolamine, saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids, and bile acids were observed in the asthma group. Bronchiolitis was distinguished by disruptions in acyl carnitine and phosphatidylcholine metabolism. CONCLUSION: This study offers a new perspective on understanding the interplay of pathogenic mechanisms underlying both asthma and bronchiolitis. Its findings are significant for enhancing the diagnostic and therapeutic strategies tailored to asthma stemming from bronchiolitis.

Some studies suggest a potential link between intestinal flora and acute pancreatitis (AP). However, the causal relationships between specific intestinal flora and AP, and the possible mediating role of immune cell traits, remain unclear. METHODS: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) involving 5,959 participants was conducted to identify genetic instrumental variables associated with 473 intestinal flora taxa. Summary statistics for AP were obtained from the UK Biobank. Immune cell traits were also identified using large-scale GWAS summary data. We employed a two-sample bidirectional Mendelian randomization (MR) approach to investigate the causal relationships between intestinal flora, immune cell traits, and AP, with inverse variance weighting (IVW) as the primary statistical method. Sensitivity analyses, including the MR-Egger intercept test, Cochran's Q test, MR-PRESSO test, and leave-one-out test, were conducted to assess the robustness of our findings. Additionally, we explored whether immune cell traits mediate the pathway from intestinal flora to AP. RESULTS: 11 positive and 11 negative causal relationships were identified between genetic susceptibility in intestinal flora and AP. Furthermore, 19 positive and 9 negative causal relationships were observed between immune cell traits and AP. Notably, CD38 mediated the causal relationship between Bacillus C and AP. CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to uncover novel causal relationships between various intestinal flora and acute pancreatitis, emphasizing the mediating role of immune cell traits in the pathway from intestinal flora to AP. It also provides new evidence supporting the conditional pathogenicity of the Bacillus genus.

The diagnosis of ulcerative colitis (UC) today is limited to a small number of biomarkers. Trimethylamine-N-oxide (TMAO) is the product of reactions resulting from the degradation of dietary-free choline, phosphatidylcholine, and carnitine metabolism by the intestinal microbiota. Earlier studies showed his involvement in the pathogenesis of UC. To study the association of TMAO with clinical, laboratory, and endoscopic indicators of UC activity. METHODS: an observational cross-sectional comparative study was conducted based on the NCJSC "KMU" clinic, Karaganda, Kazakhstan. High-performance liquid chromatography measured TMAO concentration in 63 patients with UC (age Me 37 (30-52) and 38 healthy individuals (age Me 38 (28.5-49.5). RESULTS: Median TMAO level in patients with UC-0.286 μmol/l was significantly lower than in the control group Me 0.646 μmol/l (p<0.0001). TMAO had significant differences in groups with clinically active and inactive colitis (P=0.003). TMAO correlated with disease activity by Montreal scale (r=-0.389, P=0.002) and severity of attack by Truelove-Witts (r=-0.301, P=0.027 respectively), patient's age (r=0.377, P=0.003), stool frequency (r=-0.427, P=0.001); laboratory parameters: WBC (r=-0.31, P=0.042), blood albumin (r=0.379, P=0.002) and fecal calprotectin (r=-0.314, P=0.022). TMAO did not differ between groups divided by the extent of the pathological process and endoscopic activity. CONCLUSION: in patients with UC, TMAO levels decrease compared with healthy individuals and differences in groups depend on the disease activity. These results give reason to consider changes in TMAO levels as a potential marker of UC and the severity of its course.

A self-administered survey was designed after reviewing the literature. Participants' demographics were collected, and questions to evaluate pharmacists' knowledge, attitudes, and practices toward antibiotic and probiotic dispensing were asked. The data were analyzed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences V.26. Pearson correlations and one-way ANOVA were employed to calculate the significance of knowledge, attitudes, and practices. Statistical significance was considered at p < 0.05. RESULTS: Of the 333 respondents, around 75% (n=250) had a high level of general knowledge regarding the human gut microbiome. Almost equal proportions of participants had either intermediate or high levels of knowledge about the role of gut bacteria in health (n=164, 49.2%) (n=166, 49.8%), respectively, while almost two-thirds had an intermediate level of knowledge of the role of gut bacteria in disease (n=197, 59.2%). More than half of the participants had a positive attitude toward antibiotics, probiotics, and the human microbiome (n=179, 53.8%), and the majority (n=239, 71.8%) had an intermediate level of practice with them. There was a significant positive correlation between pharmacists' general knowledge of the human microbiome and their positive attitudes (r=0.306, p < 0.01) and practices (r=0.331, p < 0.01) toward antibiotics and probiotics. CONCLUSION: Study results raise the importance of interventional educational measures to promote healthcare professionals' knowledge of the human microbiome and their potential beneficence on pharmacists' attitudes and practices regarding antibiotics and probiotics dispensing. The results also denote the urgent need for probiotics' clinical guidelines to ensure practice uniformity.

Tongxieyaofang (TXYF) was a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) formula for the treatment of diarrhea with liver stagnation and spleen deficiency syndrome, but the potential targets and mechanisms have not been fully clarified. This study aims to explore the potential mechanisms of TXYF in alleviating diarrhea using network pharmacology and full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing. METHODS: Network pharmacology was applied to identify bioactive compounds and potential targets involved in the role of TXYF in alleviating diarrhea. Meanwhile, a model of diarrhea with liver stagnation and spleen deficiency syndrome was constructed by intragastric administration of Folium senna extract combined with restraint and tail pinch stress. The effect of TXYF on intestinal mucosal microbiota of diarrhea mice was analyzed by full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: Network pharmacology analysis showed that kaempferol, wogonin, naringenin, and nobiletin were compounds associated with the efficacy of TXYF. TXYF may alleviate diarrhea via multiple BPs and pathways, including TNF signaling pathway, IL-17 signaling pathway, and Toll-like receptor signaling pathway, which are involved in TCM-gut microbiota-host interactions. Then, we found that TXYF administration reshaped the diversity and composition of the intestinal mucosal microbial community of diarrhea mice. Lactobacillus, primarily Lactobacillus johnsonii, was enriched by the administration of TXYF. After TXYF administration, the abundance of Lactobacillus, particularly Lactobacillus johnsonii, was enriched. CONCLUSION: Oral administration of TXYF may alleviate diarrhea through remodeling intestinal mucosal microbiota. Promoting the colonization of beneficial commensal bacteria in the intestinal mucosa through gut microbiota-host interactions may be a potential mechanism of TXYF in the treatment of diarrhea.

Coronary thrombosis events continue to be the leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. Recently, emerging evidence has highlighted the role of gut microbiota in cardiovascular disease, but few studies have systematically investigated the gut microbiota variation associated with atherothrombosis. METHODS: We conducted multi-omics analysis (metagenomics sequencing and serum metabolomics) on 146 subjects from Peking Union Medical College Hospital-Coronary Artery Disease (PUMCH-CAD) cohort. We analyzed the key strains and metabolic pathways related to coronary artery disease (CAD) development, explored the bacterial functional pathway which contributes to atherothrombosis at strain level in depth. Single strain colonization procedures on germ free mice demonstrated the promotion of platelet activation and thrombotic phenotypes of the disordered gut microbiota. RESULTS: Gut microbiome and serum metabolome shifts were apparent in cases of CAD progression, Bacteroides spp. disturbed the development of CAD by participating in lipopolysaccharide (LPS), menaquinone and methanogenesis pathways. Particularly, coronary thrombosis is characterized by increased circulatory levels of L-tryptophan, which correlate with Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron that has enriched biosynthetic potential. In germ free mice we demonstrate that Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron colonization could induce thrombosis, aggravate platelet hyperreactivity and augment fecal levels of L-tryptophan. CONCLUSIONS: The disordered gut microbiota of CAD contributed to the occurrence and development of atherothrombosis. The key members of the bacterial and metabolic features may become biomarkers for predicting the cardiovascular thrombosis event. Targeting the microbial pathway may have the potential to reduce the incidence of cardiovascular disorders. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ChiCTR2000033897, https://www.chictr.org.cn/showproj.html?proj=55023.

This study utilized a young febrile rat model previously reported by our team and extended the rat body temperature monitoring period following drug administration to explore the differences in efficacy between XQJRG and the commonly used pediatric antipyretic ibuprofen. Subsequently, the colonic contents of rats were analyzed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing and untargeted metabolomics. The short-chain fatty acid content was quantified using high-throughput targeted metabolomics. The expression of short-chain fatty acid receptors and pro-inflammatory genes in the colonic tissue was evaluated using quantitative real-time PCR, Western blot, and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. RESULTS: XQJRG showed a longer antipyretic duration than ibuprofen. XQJRG improved dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota in young febrile rats, bringing its flora composition closer to that of normal rats. It significantly increased the relative abundance of s_Phascolarctobacterium_faecium and s_Roseburia_sp. related to the production of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), the contents of butyric acid and nonanoic acid and protein levels of SCFAs receptor GPR41. Moreover, XQJRG significantly increased the levels of metabolites with anti-inflammatory effects, reduced the contents of metabolites directly associated with fever, and decreased the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1β and monocyte chemotactic protein-1 in the colon of young febrile rats to normal levels. CONCLUSION: XQJRG exhibited a more stable and persistent antipyretic effect in young febrile rats compared to ibuprofen. Its mechanism was at least partially attributed to regulating intestinal flora disorders, increasing anti-inflammatory metabolites, and inhibiting the production of inflammatory factors in young febrile rats.

Forty-seven obese middle-aged women (Age: 44.5 ± 5.94 years, body fat percentage: 40.0 ± 4.1%) were recruited and assigned into four groups: control group (C, n = 12), probiotics group (P, n = 12), HIIT group (H, n = 11), and HIIT with probiotics group (HP, n = 12). All the participants consumed probiotics (Lactiplantibacillus plantarum TWK10, 6 × 1010 CFU/day) or placebo supplements daily. Exercise intervention groups conducted HIIT training (85-90% vVO2max for 2 min, followed by a 1-min inactive rest interval, repeated for 7 cycles) 3 sessions per week for 8 weeks. Anthropometry, cardiorespiratory endurance, blood glucose, and lipid profile were measured at baseline and after the 8-week intervention. RESULTS: After the intervention, there were significant changes between groups in the variations and rates of change in waist circumference, hip circumference, and TTE. The waist circumference in group H significantly increased compared to groups C and P, while group HP did not show significant difference compared to group C. On the other hand, the hip circumference decreased significantly in group HP compared to group C, and the decreased rate in group HP was significantly greater than in groups C and P. Furthermore, the increase rates in TTE were higher in group H and HP compared to group C. CONCLUSION: HIIT improves TTE but negatively affects waist circumference compared to the control group. However, when combined with probiotics, the probiotics not only help enhance TTE but also counteract the negative impact on waist circumference and further reduce hip circumference, resulting in a synergistic effect. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT06285578.

In a cross-sectional study of 123 healthy lactating women, HM samples were collected up to 1 month postpartum and analyzed using the Biocrates MxP Quant 500 kit. Maternal and neonatal clinical, anthropometric, and nutritional data were collected. A total of 432 metabolites were quantified and categorized into 20 groups. The metabolomic profiles formed three distinct clusters, primarily driven by triglyceride concentration differences. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) levels were higher in HM from mothers with vaginal delivery compared to C-section births and differences in hexoses were found between exclusive and mixed-feeding practices. Maternal diets rich in lipids and animal proteins were associated with elevated amino acids, sphingolipids, and glycosyl-ceramides. CONCLUSION: The HM metabolome was grouped into three clusters influenced by delivery mode, lactation practices, and maternal diet. This comprehensive analysis opens new avenues to explore HM composition and offers valuable insights for future dietary interventions aimed at modulating HM.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is a growing health concern and the risk of its development is connected with the increasing prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MetS) which occurs as a result of some complex obesity-induced metabolic changes. It is a common chronic liver disease characterized by excessive fat accumulation in the liver, the tendency to progress to more severe forms, and a corresponding increase in morbidity and mortality. Thus, effectively addressing the rising burden of the disease requires a thorough understanding of its complex interrelationship with obesity and MetS. MAIN BODY: MASLD results from complex interactions involving obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidaemia, leading to hepatic lipid accumulation, and is influenced by several genetic and environmental factors such as diet and gut microbiota dysbiosis. It has extensive metabolic and non-metabolic implications, including links to MetS components like hyperglycaemia, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia, and progresses to significant liver damage and other extra-hepatic risks like cardiovascular disease and certain cancers. Diagnosis often relies on imaging and histology, with non-invasive methods preferred over liver biopsies. Emerging biomarkers and OMIC technologies offer improved diagnostic capabilities but face practical challenges. Advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), lifestyle interventions, and pharmacological treatments show promise, with future efforts focusing on precision medicine and novel diagnostic tools to improve patient outcome. CONCLUSION: Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the development of MASLD within the context of metabolic syndrome (MetS) is essential for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Advancements in non-invasive diagnostic tools and novel pharmacological treatments, hold promise for improving the management of MASLD. Future research should focus on precision medicine and innovative therapies to effectively address the disease and its consequences.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder marked by the progressive loss of motor neurons. Recent insights into ALS pathogenesis underscore the pivotal role of the gut microbiome, prompting an investigation into the potential therapeutic impact of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) on sporadic ALS patients. METHODS: Conducted as a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, randomized clinical trial, the study enrolled 27 participants from October 2022 to April 2023. The participants were followed up for 6 months from February 2023 to October 2023, during in-person visits at baseline, week 15, week 23, and week 35. The participants, evenly randomized, received either healthy donor FMT (FMT, n = 14) or a mixture of 0.9% saline and food coloring (E150c) as sham transplantation (placebo, n = 13). The primary outcome measured the change in the ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) total score from baseline to week 35. Secondary outcomes included changes in gastrointestinal and respiratory functions, muscle strength, autonomic function, cognition, quality of life, intestinal microbiome composition, and plasm neurofilament light chain protein (NFL). Efficacy and safety outcomes were assessed in the intention-to-treat population. RESULTS: A total of 27 randomized patients (47% women; mean age, 67.2 years), 24 participants completed the entire study. Notably, ALSFRS-R score changes exhibited no significant differences between FMT (6.1 [SD, 3.11]) and placebo (6.41[SD, 2.73]) groups from baseline to week 35. Secondary efficacy outcomes, encompassing respiratory function, muscle strength, autonomic function, cognition, quality of life, and plasm NFL, showed no significant differences. Nevertheless, the FMT group exhibited improvements in constipation, depression, and anxiety symptoms. FMT induced a shift in gut microbiome community composition, marked by increased abundance of Bifidobacterium, which persisted until week 15 (95% CI, 0.04 to 0.28; p = 0.01). Gastrointestinal adverse events were the primary manifestations of FMT-related side effects. CONCLUSIONS: In this clinical trial involving 27 sporadic ALS patients, FMT did not significantly slow the decline in ALSFRS-R score. Larger multicenter trials are needed to confirm the efficacy of FMT in sporadic ALS patients and to explore the underlying biological mechanisms. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry Identifier: ChiCTR 2200064504.

The gut microbiome has been reported to induce epigenetic modifications in the host, which may be involved in the pathophysiology of metabolic diseases. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential interactions between the gut microbiome and DNA methylome in subjects with different metabolic characteristics. METHODS: Sixty-four participants with different metabolic characteristics (i.e., participants without obesity -healthy controls-, and participants with obesity and normal insulin sensitivity/insulin resistance/ type 2 diabetes-T2DM-) were included in this study. A machine learning approach was performed in order to identify distinctive patterns in three omics (gut microbiome, blood DNA methylome, and visceral adipose tissue-VAT- DNA methylome) according to the different study groups. RESULTS: Robust distinctive distribution patterns of the three different omics were found between healthy controls and patients with obesity; participants with and without T2DM, and patients with obesity with and without insulin resistance. Importantly, strong correlations between the gut microbiome (including Odoribacteriaceae and Christensenllaceae families) and both blood and VAT DNA methylome were found. Moreover, in the entire study population, three main bacterial genera (Sutterella, Collinsella and Eubacterium) were related to the epigenetic regulation of different genes involved in distinct processes related to cellular metabolism and metabolic diseases, including small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) transferase activity or lipid binding. CONCLUSION: We show that distinctive interactions between the gut microbiome and DNA methylome may occur in subjects with different metabolic characteristics. Further research is needed to elucidate the potential role of these interactions in the pathophysiology of obesity and related comorbidities.

100 subgingival plaque samples were collected from 50 subjects (16 MP, 17 SP and 17 PH), forming six groups: PHS (PH, shallow), MPS (MP, shallow), MPM (MP, moderate), SPS (SP, shallow), SPM (SP, moderate), and SPD (SP, deep). Samples were analyzed using high-throughput sequencing. RESULT: The subgingival microbiome showed significant differences associated with both PD and periodontitis stage (p < 0.05). With increasing PD, alpha diversity initially increased and then decreased. Pathogenic genera like Fusobacterium, Filifactor, and Porphyromonas increased, while health-associated genera like Streptococcus and Haemophilus decreased. At shallow sites, the PHS, MPS, and SPS groups showed similar community structure. At moderate and deep sites, the SPM and SPD groups exhibited significant differences in community structure compared to the MPM group, with the SPM and SPD groups showing decreased abundances of Actinomyces and increased abundances of Treponema. The microbial co-networks in the SPD and SPM groups exhibited greater complexity and connectivity and were more resilient to random microbial or node removal. CONCLUSIONS: The subgingival microbiome shows strong associations with PD and periodontitis stage. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Once periodontitis progresses to stage III/IV, reconstructing a healthy subgingival microbiome may be challenging, emphasizing the importance of early prevention.

Seventy-two healthy adult Sprague?Dawley male rats were selected and randomly divided into a normal group, model group, low-dose group, medium-dose group, high-dose group, and diclofenac group using a random number table method, with 12 rats in each group. After group intervention, the general condition of the rats in each group was monitored and recorded, and the swelling index was measured. After separating the serum, the changes in glutamic pyruvic transaminase (ALT), glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (AST), carbamide (UREA), creatinine (CREA), triglyceride (TG), total serum cholesterol (TC), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), and high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) in the serum of the rats in each group were measured using an automatic biochemical analyzer. The levels of motilin (MTL), gastrin (GAS), endothelin (ET), calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP), heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), interleukin (IL)-1β, and nuclear factor kappa-B (NF-κB) in the serum of the rats in each group were evaluated using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits. Kidney tissues were used to evaluate the protein and mRNA expression of aquaporin (AQP) 1 and AQP2. Colon tissue was used to evaluate the protein and mRNA expression of AQP3 and AQP4 by Western blotting (WB) assay and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT?qPCR). The levels of ALT, AST, UREA, and CREA were used to evaluate the liver and kidney function of rats. The levels of MTL and GAS were used to evaluate the gastrointestinal function of rats. The levels of TG, TC, LDL-C, HDL-C, AQP1, AQP2, AQP3, and AQP4 were used to evaluate the "dampness" syndrome performance in rats. The levels of ET, CGRP, and HSP70 were used to evaluate the "heat" syndrome performance in rats. The levels of IL-1β and NF-κB were used to evaluate the degree of inflammation in rats. The pathological changes in synovial and colonic tissues were observed by hematoxylin and eosin staining. RESULTS: Except for the normal group, after modeling treatment, the ankle joint of rats in both the model group and drug treatment groups gradually swelled, reaching a peak at 12 h, and then gradually began to subside. The results of biochemical analyzer detection indicated that the serum ALT, AST, UREA, CREA, TG, TC and LDL-C levels were significantly higher, but the HDL-C level was significantly lower in the rats of the model group than in the rats of the normal group (P < 0.05). The serum ALT, AST, UREA, CREA, MTL, TC and LDL-C levels were significantly lower, but the HDL-C level was significantly higher in the rats of all drug treatment groups than in the rats of the model group (P < 0.05). The results of ELISA detection indicated that the MTL, GAS, ET, HSP70, IL-1β, and NF-κB levels were significantly higher, but the CGRP level was significantly lower in the rats of the model group than in the rats of the normal group (P < 0.05). The levels of MTL, GAS, ET, HSP70, IL-1β, and NF-κB were significantly lower, but CGRP was significantly higher in the rats of the drug treatment groups than in the rats of the model group (P < 0.05). The results of WB and RT-qPCR indicated that compared to the normal group, the levels of AQP1 and AQP2 in the model group were significantly higher in the kidney tissue, whereas the levels of AQP3 and AQP4 were significantly lower in the colon tissue (P < 0.05). Compared to those in the model group, the levels of AQP1 and AQP2 in the drug treatment groups were significantly lower in the kidney tissue, whereas the levels of AQP3 and AQP4 were significantly higher in the colon tissue (P < 0.05). In the model group, erosion of the colonic mucosal surface and inflammatory exudate occurred. Some mucosal epithelium had fallen off, the number of glands in the lamina propria was lower, many inflammatory cells infiltrated the interstitial layer, the connective tissue in the submucosa became loose and edematous, and lymph follicles developed. We found a significant proliferation of synovial cells in the ankle joint, an increase in cell density and neovascularization, and visible infiltration of inflammatory cells. The cartilage surface was not smooth. However, each drug group could improve the pathological changes in intestinal and synovial tissues to varying degrees. CONCLUSIONS: Blood lipid metabolism indexes and AQPs could be used as objective evaluation indexes for the "dampness" syndrome performance of damp-heat accumulation type GA. ET, HSP70 and CGRP could be used as objective evaluation indexes for the "heat" syndrome performance, and the immune inflammation index could be used as objective evaluation indexes for the inflammation degree. The overall efficacy of TFQXF in the treatment of damp-heat accumulation-type GA could be determined by adjusting the above objective evaluation indexes. It provided some ideas and directions for clinical risk assessments and drug development of GA.

A rat model of FD was established through the tail-clamping stimulation method. The rat model of FD was assessed by the state of rats, their weight, sucrose preference rate, and intestinal propulsion rate. The DNA was extracted from stool samples after treatment with SMT. Amplified polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products of the 16S rDNA were sequenced using NovaseQ6000 after construction of libraries. Composition of gut microbial community in the stool samples was determined and analyzed by cluster analysis, bioinformatic analysis, and analysis of α-diversity and β-diversity. RESULTS: The rat model of FD was successfully established using the tail-clamping stimulation method. The statistical results of cluster analysis of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) showed that the relative abundance of OTUs in the FD group was the lowest, while it was the highest in the normal (N) group. The composition of microbiome in the four groups was similar at phyla level. Compared with the FD group, the abundance of Firmicutes was downregulated, and the abundance of Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes was upregulated in the Simo Tang (SMT) and high-dose Simo Tang (SMT.G) groups. The ratio of Bacteroidetes/ Firmicutes was also elevated. According to the analysis of α-diversity and β-diversity, the abundance of flora in FD rats was significantly reduced. The treatment using SMT appeared beneficial to improve the diversity of flora. SMT could improve the intestinal flora in FD rats. The results showed that FD rats had intestinal flora imbalance, and species diversity increased. The results suggested that SMT could regulate the disorders of intestinal flora caused by FD. CONCLUDIONS: SMT could restore gut homeostasis and maintain gut flora diversity by modulating the gut microbiota and its associated metabolites in rats, thereby treating gastrointestinal diseases.

Precision nutrition is based on the integration of individual´s phenotypical and biological characteristics including genetic variants, epigenetic marks, gut microbiota profiles and metabolites fingerprints as well as medical history, lifestyle practices, and environmental and cultural factors. Thus, nutriomics areas including Nutrigenomics, Nutrigenetics, Nutriepigenetics, Nutrimetabolomics, and Nutrimetagenomics have emerged to comprehensively understand the complex interactions between nutrients, diet, and the human body's molecular processes through precision nutrition. SUMMARY: This document from the Ibero-American Network of Nutriomics and Precision Nutrition (RINN22; https://rinn22.com/) provides a comprehensive overview of the concepts of precision nutrition approaches to guide their application in clinical and public health as well as establish the position of RINN22 regarding the current and future state of precision nutrition. KEY MESSAGES: The progress and participation of nutriomics to precision nutrition is an essential pillar for addressing diet-related diseases and developing innovative managing strategies, which will be promoted by advances in bioinformatics, machine learning and integrative software as well as the description of specific novel biomarkers. In this context, synthesizing and critically evaluating the latest developments, potential applications and future needs in the field of nutrition is necessary with a holistic perspective, incorporating progress in omics technologies aimed at precision nutrition interventions. This approach must address and confront healthy, social, food security, physically active lifestyle, sanitation and sustainability challenges with preventive, participatory, and predictive strategies of personalized, population and planetary nutrition for a precision tailored health.

The respiratory microbiota influences infant immune system maturation. Little is known about how perinatal, physiological, and environmental exposures impact the nasal microbiota in preterm infants after discharge, or nasal microbiota differences between preterm and healthy full-term infants. METHODS: Nasal swabs (from 136 preterm and 299 full-term infants at mean postmenstrual age of 45 weeks from the prospective Basel-Bern Infant Lung Development cohort) were analyzed by 16S-rRNA gene amplification and sequencing (Illumina MiSeq). Associations were tested with multivariable linear regression and principal coordinate analysis. RESULTS: Presence of older siblings in preterm infants was associated with β-diversity (PERMANOVA p = 0.001) and an increased abundance of Moraxella and Haemophilus. The nasal microbiota of preterm infants exhibited a distinct composition compared to that of full-term infants (PERMANOVA, R2 = 0.014, p = 0.001), characterized by a reduced abundance of the Moraxella and Dolosigranulum genera (ANCOM-BC, p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that, despite both infant groups having similar nasal microbiota patterns, there are some disparities which suggest that prematurity influences the initial microbiota colonization. In preterm infants the presence of older siblings had an effect on the nasal microbiota, whereas perinatal and early postnatal factors did not show significant effects. IMPACT: Presence of older siblings affected the nasal microbiota of preterm infants. This study demonstrated that microbiota composition differs between full-term and preterm infants, with a lower abundance of Moraxella and Dolosigranulum in preterm infants. Examining the differences in nasal microbiota between preterm and full-term infants may contribute to understanding the trajectory of the bacterial component of the nasal microbiota of preterm infants.

Many observational studies have shown a close association between gut microbiota and the risk of various duodenal diseases. Therefore, we urgently explore the potential causal relationship between gut microbiota and some duodenal diseases, mainly including duodenal ulcers and duodenitis. METHODS: We conducted Mendelian randomization (MR) studies using genetic instrumental variables for gut microbiota from GWAS and duodenal disease datasets. Causal relationships were examined using multiple MR methods with Bonferroni correction. Bayesian Weighted Mendelian Randomization (BWMR) assessed causal relationships, employing ELBO and weighted data. Reverse MR analysis was conducted on microbiota showing significant causal relationships with duodenal diseases. RESULTS: Through MR analysis, we identified three gut microbiota that promote the occurrence of duodenal ulcers (family. Coriobacteriaceae: OR=1.003; 95% CI=1.0005-1.0056; p=0.016, genus.RuminococcaceaeUCG003: OR=1.006; 95% CI=1.002-1.007; p=0.002, order. Coriobacteriales: OR=1.003; 95% CI=1.0005-1.0056; p=0.016), one microbiota that inhibits the occurrence of duodenitis (family. Acidaminococcaceae: OR=0.994; 95% CI=0.988-0.999; p=0.046), and one microbiota that promotes the occurrence of duodenitis (genus..Eubacteriumcoprostanoligenesgroup: OR=1.006; 95% CI=1.0005-1.013; p=0.033). Further confirmation of the occurrence of duodenal ulcers and the production of family.Coriobacteriaceae and order.Coriobacteriales microbiota was obtained through reverse MR analysis, indicating that the occurrence of duodenal ulcers also promotes the growth of these microbiota. CONCLUSION: Our study employs Mendelian randomization techniques to demonstrate a causal relationship between specific gut microbiota and duodenal ulcers and duodenitis. Additionally, our analysis suggests that duodenal ulcer occurrence promotes the growth of certain microbiota, emphasizing the intricate interplay between gut microbiota composition and these diseases.

The gut microbiota (GM) plays a critical role in regulating human physiology, with dysbiosis linked to various diseases, including heart failure (HF). HF is a complex syndrome with a significant global health impact, as its incidence doubles with each decade of life, and its prevalence peaks in individuals over 80 years. A bidirectional interaction exists between GM and HF, where alterations in gut health can worsen the disease's progression. MAIN BODY: The "gut hypothesis of HF" suggests that HF-induced changes, such as reduced intestinal perfusion and altered gut motility, negatively impact GM composition, leading to increased intestinal permeability, the release of GM-derived metabolites into the bloodstream, and systemic inflammation. This process creates a vicious cycle that further deteriorates heart function. GM-derived metabolites, including trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), and secondary bile acids (BAs), can influence gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone modifications. These epigenetic changes may play a crucial role in mediating the effects of dysbiotic gut microbial metabolites, linking them to altered cardiac health and contributing to the progression of HF. This process is particularly relevant in older individuals, as the aging process itself has been associated with both dysbiosis and cumulative epigenetic alterations, intensifying the interplay between GM, epigenetic changes, and HF, and further increasing the risk of HF in the elderly. CONCLUSION: Despite the growing body of evidence, the complex interplay between GM, epigenetic modifications, and HF remains poorly understood. The dynamic nature of epigenetics and GM, shaped by various factors such as age, diet, and lifestyle, presents significant challenges in elucidating the precise mechanisms underlying this complex relationship. Future research should prioritize innovative approaches to overcome these limitations. By identifying specific metabolite-induced epigenetic modifications and modulating the composition and function of GM, novel and personalized therapeutic strategies for the prevention and/or treatment of HF can be developed. Moreover, targeted research focusing specifically on older individuals is crucial for understanding the intricate connections between GM, epigenetics, and HF during aging.

The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral reservoir remain poorly understood. RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research field. CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an effective cure for HIV.

Chronic apical periodontitis (CAP) has been linked to the development of atherosclerosis, although the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. This study aimed to investigate the role of gut microbiota disruption in CAP-induced atherosclerosis development, focusing on trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO)-related metabolites. METHODS: The study utilized fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) to transfer gut microbiota from mice with CAP to healthy mice. Atherosclerosis development was assessed by analyzing lesions in the aortic arch and aortic root. Serum lipid and inflammatory factor levels were measured. Composition and diversity of gut microbiota were analyzed using targeted metabolomics, with a focus on the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes. The expression of hepatic flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) and serum TMAO levels were also evaluated. RESULTS: Mice receiving gut microbiota from CAP mice showed increased atherosclerotic lesions compared to controls, without significant differences in serum lipid or inflammatory factor levels. Alterations in gut microbiota composition were observed, characterized by an increase in the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio. Peptostreptococcaceae abundance positively correlated with atherosclerosis severity, while Odoribacteraceae showed a negative correlation. No significant differences were found in hepatic FMO3 expression or serum TMAO levels. CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms the role of gut microbiota disruption in CAP-mediated atherosclerosis development, independent of serum lipid or TMAO levels. Alterations in gut microbiota composition, particularly increased Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio and specific bacterial families, were associated with atherosclerosis severity. These findings highlight the intricate interplay between gut microbiota and cardiovascular health in the context of CAP.

Allergic rhinitis (AR) subjects might have their microenvironment changed due to pathogenesis and living environment. Whether the nasal microbe in AR children differs from healthy subjects and how it interplays with dermal, oral and indoor dust microbe needs to be elucidated. METHODS: In this case-control study, we analyzed and compared the bacterial characterization and associations in nasal, dermal, oral swab samples and dust samples in 62 children with physician-diagnosed AR(cases) and 51 age- and gender-matched healthy ones with no history of allergic diseases(controls). Full-length 16S rRNA sequencing(swabs) and shotgun metagenomics(dust) were applied. Bacterial diversity, composition, abundance difference characteristics and fast expectation-maximization for microbial source tracking(FEAST) analysis were performed and compared between cases and controls. RESULTS: The α-diversity of dust microorganisms in AR was lower than that in control group (P = 0.034), and the β-diversity indices of microorganisms in nasal cavity (P = 0.020), skin (P = 0.001) and dust (P = 0.004) were significantly different from those in control group. At species levels, a total of 10, 15, 12, and 15 bacterial species were differentially enriched in either cases or controls in nasal, dermal, oral, and dust samples, respectively(Linear Discriminant Analysis(LDA) score > 2, P < 0.05). Staphylococcus epidermidis was the single species simultaneously more abundant in nasal, dermal and dust samples in AR children. By FEAST analysis, 8.85% and 10.11% of S. epidermidis in AR dermal and dust samples came from nasal cavity. These proportions were significantly higher than those in controls (2.70% and 3.86%) (P < 0.05). The same significantly higher transfer proportions(P < 0.05) were observed for Staphylococcus aureus enriched in the nasal cavity in AR children. Classification models by random forest regression at species levels showed, bacterial species enriched in indoor dust, nasal and dermal samples had substantial power in distinguishing AR children from healthy ones, with the highest power in the dust samples (AUC = 0.88) followed by nasal(AUC = 0.81) and dermal ones(AUC = 0.80). CONCLUSIONS: Our study presented the microbial enrichment characteristics in AR children both in the living environment(dust) and body sites exposed to environment through inhalation(nasal cavity), contact(skin) and ingestion(oral cavity) pathways, respectively. Nasal S.epidermidis and S.aureus had dominant influences on dust and other body sites in AR children.

Lichen sclerosus (LS) is a chronic inflammatory cicatricial skin disease that can lead to urethral stricture or even malignant transformation and the etiology is still unknown. This study comparatively analyzed the balanopreputial swab and urine microbiota simultaneously between male patients with LS urethral stricture (LSUS) and non-LS urethral stricture (non-LSUS). METHODS: We prospectively included 31 male patients with LSUS and 30 with non-LSUS in this case-control study. Midstream urine samples and balanopreputial swabs were collected from each patient for the 16S V3-V4 hypervariable region sequencing. Operational taxonomic units were defined using a > 97% sequence similarity threshold. We compared the differences in alpha diversity, beta diversity, and microbial structure between the two groups. RESULTS: Whether in swab or urine samples, there was no significant difference in alpha diversity between the two groups. Swab samples showed a significant difference in beta diversity (p = 0.001). For all individuals, composition analyses showed that the most abundant phyla were Actinobacteria, Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes in both samples. Additionally, the microbial communities of swab samples were significantly more similar to the communities of urine samples in the LSUS group (p = 0.047). CONCLUSIONS: Microbiota showed significant variation between LSUS and non-LSUS groups, suggesting that microecological imbalance may be closely related to the occurrence of LS. Urinary irritation may be related to the unique microbiota on the genital skin of patients with LSUS.

This prospective study enrolled 230 CD patients and 46 healthy controls (HCs). Participants voluntarily underwent brain MRI and psychological assessment (n = 155), blood metabolomics analysis (n = 260), and/or fecal 16S rRNA sequencing (n = 182). The RM was developed using 13 features selected from 13,870 first-order features extracted from multiparameter brain MRI in training cohort (CD, n = 75; HCs, n = 32) and validated in test cohort (CD, n = 34; HCs, n = 14). Multiomics data (including gut microbiomics, blood metabolomics, and brain radiomics) were compared between CD patients and HCs. RESULTS: In the training cohort, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of RM for distinguishing CD patients from HCs was 0.991 (95% confidence interval (CI), 0.975-1.000). In test cohort, RM showed an AUC of 0.956 (95% CI, 0.881-1.000). CD-enriched blood metabolites such as triacylglycerol (TAG) exhibited significant correlations with both brain features detected by RM and CD-enriched microbiota (e.g., Veillonella). One notable correlation was found between Veillonella and Ctx-Lh-Middle-Temporal-CBF-p90 (r = 0.41). Mediation analysis further revealed that dysbiosis, such as of Veillonella, may regulate the blood flow in the middle temporal cortex through TAG. CONCLUSION: We developed a multiparameter MRI-based RM that characterized the neural alterations of CD patients, and multiomics data offer potential evidence to support the validity of our model. Our study may offer clues to help provide potential therapeutic targets. CRITICAL RELEVANCE STATEMENT: Our brain-gut axis study developed a novel model using multiparameter MRI and radiomics to characterize brain changes in patients with Crohn's disease. We validated this model's effectiveness using multiomics data, making it a potential biomarker for better patient management. KEY POINTS: Utilizing multiparametric MRI and radiomics techniques could unveil Crohn's disease's neurophenotype. The neurophenotype radiomics model is interpreted using multiomics data. This model may serve as a novel biomarker for Crohn's disease management.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in Neisseria gonorrhoeae (NG) is an urgent global health concern. Commensal Neisseria species in the oropharynx are an important reservoir of AMR genes that are transferred to NG, yet few data about AMR among commensal Neisseria in populations at risk for AMR exist. METHODS: From May 2022 - December 2023, men in a HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis program in Hanoi, Vietnam, were recruited. Participants self-collected oral specimens using phosphate buffer solution (PBS), for culture on LB agar media containing sucrose, vancomycin and trimethoprim (LBVT.SNR). Oxidase-positive gram-negative diplococci were identified using Remel RapID NH system. Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) to azithromycin, ceftriaxone, cefixime, and doxycycline were determined using Etests. RESULTS: There were 42 male participants, the median age was 26 years and 29% (n=12) reported using antibiotics in the past 6 months. In total, 48 Neisseria isolates were recovered; N. sicca/subflava was the most common species (50%; n=24), followed by N. mucosa (38%; n=18). For azithromycin, 85% (n=41) of isolates were resistant with MICs ≥1 ug/ml, including 25% (n=12) with high-level resistance (MICs ≥ 256 ug/mL of which 67% (8/12) were N. mucosa. Among non-gonococcal Neisseria isolates, the prevalence of resistance was 6% (n=3) for ceftriaxone, 6% (n=3) for cefixime, and 54% (n=26) for doxycycline; most non-susceptible isolates were N. mucosa. CONCLUSION: A High frequency of azithromycin resistance, moderate doxycycline resistance, and low cephalosporin resistance was found in oropharyngeal Neisseria isolates from MSM in a PrEP program in Hanoi, Vietnam. N. mucosa was over-represented among resistant isolates.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease closely related to gut microbiota dysbiosis and intestinal homeostasis imbalance. Sishen Pill&Tongxieyaofang (SSP-TXYF) has a long history of application in traditional Chinese medicine and is widely used in UC clinics. However, its mechanism of action is still unclear. PURPOSE: This study aimed to explore the potential regulatory role of SSP-TXYF in protecting against UC through metabolites produced by the intestinal microbiota, and elucidate its underlying molecular mechanism. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: 16S rRNA and UPLC-QE-Orbitrap-MS were used to assess the microbiota and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). A rat model of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS)-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis was used to study the effects of SSP-TXYF on UC in vivo. Intestinal epithelial cells-6 (IEC-6) were treated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The intestinal mucosal barrier (IMB) functions were investigated by alcian blue staining and western blot analysis. The mechanism of SSP-TXYF influenced the HIF-1α acetylation pathway was examined by real-time fluorescence quantitative PCR (qPCR), Western blotting, and Co-immunoprecipitation. RESULTS: Using 16S rRNA gene-based microbiota analysis, we found that SSP-TXYF ameliorated TNBS-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis. We found that SSP-TXYF significantly inhibited the decreased abundance of Firmicutes in UC rats, in addition, the abundance of Actinobacteria was also improved. The mechanism of SSP-TXYF-treated TNBS-induced UC resulted from improved IMB functions via the activation of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1α) acetylation. Notably, SSP-TXYF Enriched microbiota-derived metabolites propionate and butyrate, which could activate HIF-1α acetylation in IEC. Furthermore, exogenous treatment of propionate and butyrate reproduced similar protective effects as SSP-TXYF to UC through improving HIF-1α-dependent IMB functions. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our findings suggest that the gut microbiota-propionate/butyrate-HIF-1α-IMB axis plays an important role in SSP-TXYF-maintaining intestinal homeostasis, which may represent a novel approach for UC prevention via the intervention of any link in this axis.

Utilizing the Lieber-DeCarli method, C57BL/6J male mice were subjected to a four-week liquid alcohol diet to induce ALD. The mechanism of NOB alleviating ALD is explored by detecting biochemical analysis, western blot, qRT-PCR, and gut microbiota analysis. RESULTS: In vivo, it was observed that NOB treatment (2.5 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg) significantly alleviated alcohol-induced liver inflammation, accompanied by normalization of aberrant gene and protein expression patterns associated with inflammation. Notably, this treatment also enhanced intestinal barrier integrity, resulting in decreased intestinal LPS permeability and a subsequent reduction in ileum inflammation. Furthermore, 16 S rRNA analysis demonstrated that NOB effectively ameliorated alcohol-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis by restoring the balance between Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes and promoting the growth of beneficial bacterial families like Akkermansiaceae. In vitro, utilizing LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells, NOB's efficacy in mitigating liver inflammation was further corroborated. Specifically, the treatment was found to exert its anti-inflammatory effects through modulation of the NF-κB/TLR4 signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: our study has made significant progress in understanding NOB's hepatoprotective effects on alcohol-induced ALD mice. This perspective not only clarifies NOB's therapeutic role in ALD management but also inspires future research on additional gut-liver axis indicators for a comprehensive exploration of NOB's therapeutic potential.

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a global health problem with limited therapeutic options. The biochemical mechanisms that lead to this disorder are not yet fully understood, and in this respect, metabolomics represents a promising approach to decipher metabolic events related to AUD. The plasma metabolome contains a plethora of bioactive molecules that reflects the functional changes in host metabolism but also the impact of the gut microbiome and nutritional habits. METHODS: In this study, we investigated the impact of severe AUD (sAUD), and of a 3-week period of alcohol abstinence, on the blood metabolome (non-targeted LC-MS metabolomics analysis) in 96 sAUD patients hospitalized for alcohol withdrawal. RESULTS: We found that the plasma levels of different lipids ((lyso)phosphatidylcholines, long-chain fatty acids), short-chain fatty acids (i.e. 3-hydroxyvaleric acid) and bile acids were altered in sAUD patients. In addition, several microbial metabolites, including indole-3-propionic acid, p-cresol sulfate, hippuric acid, pyrocatechol sulfate, and metabolites belonging to xanthine class (paraxanthine, theobromine and theophylline) were sensitive to alcohol exposure and alcohol withdrawal. 3-Hydroxyvaleric acid, caffeine metabolites (theobromine, paraxanthine, and theophylline) and microbial metabolites (hippuric acid and pyrocatechol sulfate) were correlated with anxiety, depression and alcohol craving. Metabolomics analysis in postmortem samples of frontal cortex and cerebrospinal fluid of those consuming a high level of alcohol revealed that those metabolites can be found also in brain tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Our data allow the identification of neuroactive metabolites, from interactions between food components and microbiota, which may represent new targets arising in the management of neuropsychiatric diseases such as sAUD. FUNDING: Gut2Behave project was initiated from ERA-NET NEURON network (Joint Transnational Call 2019) and was financed by Academy of Finland, French National Research Agency (ANR-19-NEUR-0003-03) and the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FRS-FNRS; PINT-MULTI R.8013.19, Belgium). Metabolomics analysis of the TSDS samples was supported by grant from the Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies.

Intestinal metabolomic profile and fecal microbiota were assessed in two cohorts of SODG93A mice compared to wildtype controls at the terminal stage of the ALS disease. RESULTS: Results showed a significant difference in metabolomic profile in SOD1G93A mice compared to controls but without a marked change in composition and diversity of fecal microbiota. Nevertheless, we observed an increase of Lachnospiraceae family, which are butyrate-producer bacteria, in SOD1G93A mice. Moreover, some metabolites with significantly different intestinal concentrations are partially produced and linked with intestinal bacteria, such as riboflavin, hippurate, and N-acetylputrescine, leaving us convinced of the interest in looking further into the role of the microbiota in ALS. CONCLUSIONS: Despite an alteration of the intestinal metabolome in SOD1G93A mice, microbiota data did not show significant changes, underlying the need for further research.

Peritoneal dialysis-related peritonitis (PDRP) is one of the most common complications of peritoneal dialysis (PD). Understanding the risk factors and etiological characteristics is indispensable for infection prevention and improving the outcome and life quality. METHODS: A total of 70 PD patients were separated into the PDRP group (n=25) and the control group (n=45). Variables, including gender, age, body mass index, primary diseases, and history of basic diseases, in the two groups were analyzed to assess the risk factors of PDRP. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) and microbial culture were compared in detecting pathogenic microorganisms. Gut microbiota analysis was performed in 35 PDRP patients based on mNGS data. RESULTS: Dialysis time and times of dialysate change were the risk factors of PDRP, and times of dialysate change was the independent risk factor of PDRP (p = 0.046). mNGS produced higher sensitivity (65.79%) than microbial culture (36.84%) in identifying pathogenic microorganisms. Staphylococcus aureus and Klebsiella pneumoniae (four cases) were the most frequent pathogens causing PDRP, followed by Staphylococcus capitis (three cases). β diversity of the gut microbiota was significantly different between patients with fewer times of dialysate change (≤4) and more (>5), as well as between patients with gram-positive (G+) bacterial and gram-negative (G-) bacterial infection. CONCLUSION: The dialysis time and times of dialysate changes not only are risk factors for peritonitis in PD patients but also stimulate significant changes in the gut microbiome structure in PDRP patients. These findings may provide a novel viewpoint for the management of patients with PDRP.

In this study, milk, serum, and rumen fluid samples from 40 Holstein dairy cows (on d 56 postpartum) with different rumen pH (2-4 h after morning feeding) were explored to investigate the difference of susceptibility to SARA and the correlation between microbiome, LPS and inflammation. These cows were categorized into low pH (LPH, pH ≤ 6.0, n = 20) and high pH (HPH, pH ≥ 6.5, n = 20) groups. RESULTS: The results showed that LPH group increased the concentrations of total volatile fatty acids, acetate, propionate, butyrate and valerate. However, milk yield and milk compositions were unaffected. Compared to the HPH group, the LPH group increased the concentrations of serum BHBA, NEFA, LPS, HIS, IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α, and MDA, and decreased the concentrations of serum IgA, IgM, IgG, SOD, T-AOC, and mTOR. In addition, the LPH group decreased the copies of Ruminococcus flavefaciens and increased the copies of Fibrobacter succinogenes. Microbial community analysis isupplendicated a significant difference in bacterial composition between the two groups. At the phylum level, Bacteroidota and Firmicutes were enriched in the LPH and HPH groups, respectively. At the genus level, the dominant bacteria in the LPH group were Prevotella. Additionally, the LPH group increased the proportions of Gram-negative phenotypes, potentially pathogenic phenotypes and LPS biosynthesis. The close correlation between two key enzymes for LPS synthesis LpxL and LpxM with rumen pH, inflammatory markers, and microorganisms indicates that low pH may increase the risk of inflammation by facilitating the lysis of Gram-negative bacteria and the release of penta-acylated LPS. Penta-acylated and hexa-acylated LPS may be mainly derived from Prevotella and Succinivibrionaceae_UCG-001, respectively. DISCUSSION: Overall, these results support the notion that transient low pH could reflect the risk of cows suffering from SARA and associated inflammation and is strongly associated with penta-acylated LPS. Our findings provide new insights into ruminant health improvement and disease prevention strategies.

We retrieved articles published between 2014 and 2024 from the Web of Science database and analyzed them using R software, VOSviewer, and CiteSpace. RESULTS: A total of 2,806 articles were included in this study. Research on the relationship between the MedDiet and DM showed a steady increase in publication volume from 2014 to 2019, followed by a sharp rise from 2020 to 2023. Spain was the leading country in terms of publication volume, followed by Italy, the United States, China, and Greece. Spain also led in international collaborations, with CIBER-Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red and Harvard University being the most prominent collaboration centers. Nutrients was the most frequently published and cited journal in this field. Common keywords in this literature included components such as olive oil, legumes, and red wine. Mechanisms studied in this field primarily focused on antioxidant effects, improvements in insulin sensitivity and secretion, regulation of lipid metabolism, and modulation of gut microbiota. CONCLUSION: Research on the beneficial effects of the MedDiet on DM patients has garnered significant attention from researchers worldwide, and it is expected to become a major focus for future DM prevention and treatment. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the current status and research hotspots regarding the relationship between the MedDiet and DM, offering valuable references for future research.

Records from 881 COVID-19 outpatient patients (504 females [57.9%] and 366 males [42.07%]), most of whom were between 30 and 40 years of age (mean=37.3 years old; 95% CI, 36.5-38.2), with initial infection data from February 2020 to August 2022 were reviewed once, whereas the survey took place during 2 different moments during the pandemic. The first period (April 20, 2021, to June 21, 2021) yielded 279 responses, whereas in the second period (June 23, 2021, to October 4, 2021), 602 responses were recorded. The instrument used contained 20 questions across 3 main domains: general information, data related to infection and adverse effects, and service satisfaction experience. RESULTS: All the patients were positive for immunoglobulin G antibodies against nucleocapsid by the third week. Post-COVID-19 symptoms arose at least 2 weeks after recovery from the initial illness; 654 individuals reported at least one symptom after the acute COVID-19 period, for a post-COVID-19 prevalence of 74.96%. The most frequent symptoms were fatigue (84%), headache (71%), and difficulty concentrating (71%). More than 60% of participants reported at least one comorbidity, among which the most common ones were obesity (35.9%), smoking (17.5%), and hypertension (12.2%). CONCLUSION: In this study, we assessed post-COVID-19 prevalence among outpatients and found that comorbidities were strongly related to consequences impacting quality of life and mental health burden.

The aim of this study was to explore the microbial variations and biomarkers in the oral environment of patients with persistent pulmonary nodules (pPNs) and to reveal the potential biological functions of the salivary microbiota in pPNs. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included a total of 483 participants (141 healthy controls and 342 patients with pPNs) from June 2022 and January 2024. Saliva samples were subjected to sequencing of the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene to assess microbial diversity and differential abundance. Seven advanced machine learning algorithms (logistic regression, support vector machine, multi-layer perceptron, naïve Bayes, random forest, gradient boosting decision tree, and LightGBM) were utilized to evaluate performance and identify key microorganisms, with fivefold cross-validation employed to ensure robustness. The Shapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm was employed to explain the contribution of these core microbiotas to the predictive model. Additionally, the PICRUSt2 algorithm was used to predict the microbial functions. RESULTS: The salivary microbial composition in pPNs group showed significantly lower α- and β-diversity compared to healthy controls. A high-accuracy LightGBM model was developed, identifying six core genera-Fusobacterium, Solobacterium, Actinomyces, Porphyromonas, Atopobium, and Peptostreptococcus-as pPNs biomarkers. Additionally, a visualization pPNs risk prediction system was developed. The immune responses and metabolic activities differences in salivary microbiota between the patients with pPNs and healthy controls were revealed. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the potential clinical applications of the salivary microbiota for enable earlier detection and targeted interventions, offering significant promise for advancing clinical management and improving patient outcomes in pPNs.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD), formerly known as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is becoming the most common chronic liver disease. The gut microbiome is regarded to play a crucial role in MAFLD, but the specific changes of gut microbiome, especially fungi, in different stages of MAFLD are not well understood. This study aimed to observe the longitudinal changes of colon bacteria and fungi of mice at different feeding duration of a high-fat and high-fructose diet (HFHFD), and explore the association between the changes and the progression of MAFLD. METHODS: Twenty-eight male C57BL6J mice were randomly assigned to the normal diet (ND) group and HFHFD group. At the 8th and 16th weeks, mice were sacrificed to compare the diversity, composition, and co-abundance network of bacteria and fungi in colon contents among groups. RESULTS: HFHFD-8W mice exhibited increases in Candida and Dorea, and decreases in Oscillospira and Prevotella in comparison to ND-8W mice, HFHFD-16W mice had increases in Bacteroides, Candida, Desulfovibrio, Dorea, Lactobacillus, and Rhodotorula, and decreases in Akkermansia, Aspergillus, Sterigmatomyces, and Vishniacozyma in comparison to ND-16W mice. And compared to HFHFD-8W mice, HFHFD-16W mice had increases in Desulfovibrio, Lactobacillus, Penicillium, and Rhodotorula, and decreases in Talaromyces and Wallemia. Spearman and GEE correlation analysis revealed that Bacteroides, Candida, Desulfovibrio, and Lactobacillus positively correlated with NAFLD activity score (NAS). CONCLUSION: Gut microbiota and mycobiota undergo diverse changes at different stages of MAFLD. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

Despite the increasing prevalence of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), the pathophysiology is still not fully understood. Recent evidence suggests that the gut microbiota may play a role in the pathophysiology of NAFLD and may also offer new therapeutic options. METHODS: This prospective cross-sectional study included 100 consecutive newly diagnosed obese patients (BMI ≥ 95th percentile), aged 14-18 years with NAFLD (confirmed by ultrasound), persistently elevated levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) greater than 60 U/L for 1-6 months, and 100 healthy controls. We evaluated changes in the gut microbiota in NAFLD adolescents compared with healthy controls. RESULTS: According to the multiple logistic regressions, the variables associated with NAFLD were the presence of Clostridium difficile, the presence of Salmonella spp., a greater abundance of Bifidobacterium and Prevotella, and a lower abundance of Lactobacillus. CONCLUSION: Changes in the gut microbiota occur in adolescents with NAFLD compared with healthy individuals, which may be useful for identifying youths who are amenable to gut microbiota-based interventions. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

Alcohol drinking and gut microbiota are related to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the specific relationship between them remains unclear. AIMS: We aimed to establish the alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis and develop machine learning (ML) models in predicting the occurrence of early-stage HCC. METHODS: Two hundred sixty-nine patients with early-stage HCC and 278 controls were recruited. Alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis was established through the mediation/moderation effect analyses. Eight ML algorithms including Classification and Regression Tree (CART), Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), Neural Network (NN), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) were applied. RESULTS: A total of 160 pairs of individuals were included for analyses. The mediation effects of Genus_Catenibacterium (P = 0.024), Genus_Tyzzerella_4 (P < 0.001), and Species_Tyzzerella_4 (P = 0.020) were discovered. The moderation effects of Family_Enterococcaceae (OR = 0.741, 95%CI:0.160-0.760, P = 0.017), Family_Leuconostocaceae (OR = 0.793, 95%CI:0.486-3.593, P = 0.010), Genus_Enterococcus (OR = 0.744, 95%CI:0.161-0.753, P = 0.017), Genus_Erysipelatoclostridium (OR = 0.693, 95%CI:0.062-0.672, P = 0.032), Genus_Lactobacillus (OR = 0.655, 95%CI:0.098-0.749, P = 0.011), Species_Enterococcus_faecium (OR = 0.692, 95%CI:0.061-0.673, P = 0.013), and Species_Lactobacillus (OR = 0.653, 95%CI:0.086-0.765, P = 0.014) were uncovered. The predictive power of eight ML models was satisfactory (AUCs:0.855-0.932). The XGBoost model had the best predictive ability (AUC = 0.932). CONCLUSIONS: ML models based on the alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis are valuable in predicting the occurrence of early-stage HCC.

Noninvasive sampling and 16S rRNA high-throughput sequencing were used to compare the composition and function of the gut microbiota of three dog breeds: the Chinese Kunming dog (CKD), German Shepherd dog (GSD), and Belgian Malinois dog (BMD). RESULTS: The gut microbiota of the three dog breeds consisted of 257 species across 146 genera, 60 families, 35 orders, 15 classes, and 10 phyla. The dominant bacterial phyla across the three breeds were Firmicutes (57.44%), Fusobacteriota (28.86%), and Bacteroidota (7.63%), while the dominant bacterial genera across the three breeds were Peptostreptococcus (21.08%), Fusobacterium (18.50%), Lactobacillus (12.37%), and Cetobacter (10.29%). Further analysis revealed significant differences in the intestinal flora of the three breeds at the phylum and genus levels. The intestinal flora of BMD was significantly richer than that of CKD and GSD. The functional prediction and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed that the primary functions of the gut microbiota in these breeds were similar, with significant enrichment in various metabolic pathways, including carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and microbial metabolism in different environments. The intestinal flora of these breeds also played a crucial role in genetic information processing, including transcription, translation, replication, and material transport. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These results provide novel insights into the intestinal flora of intervention dogs and suggest novel methods to improve their health status, which help increase microbial diversity and normalize metabolite production in diseased dogs.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease characterized by synovial inflammation, bone and cartilage damage, musculoskeletal pain, swelling, and stiffness. Inflammation is one of the key factors that induce RA. Jingfang Granule (JFG) is a traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) with significant anti-inflammatory effects. Clinical studies have confirmed that JFG can be used to treat RA, but the mechanism is still vague. PURPOSE: This study was designed to evaluate the protective function and the mechanism of JFG on rats with RA. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Complete Freud's Adjuvant (CFA) was used to establish a rat RA model, and JFG or Diclofenac Sodium (Dic) was orally administered. Foot swelling and hematoxylin eosin (H&E) staining were used to test the therapeutic effect of JFG on RA treatment, while ELISA kits were used to detect serum cytokines. Malondialdehyde (MDA), superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), catalase (CAT), and reactive oxygen species (ROS) were used to evaluate oxidative stress levels. The integration of label-free proteomics, fecal short chain fatty acid (SCFA) targeted metabolomics, peripheral blood SCFA, medium and long chain fatty acid targeted metabolomics, and 16S rDNA sequencing of gut microbiota were used to screen the mechanism. Western blot technology was used to validate the results of multiple omics studies. Serum D-Lactic acid, lipopolysaccharide specific IgA antibody (LPS IgA), diamine oxidase (DAO), and colon Claudin 5 and ZO-1 were used to evaluate the intestinal barrier. RESULTS: The results confirmed that JFG effectively protected rats from RA injury, which was confirmed by improved foot swelling and synovial pathology. At the same time, JFG reduced the levels of TNF-α, IL-1β, and IL-6 in serum by inhibiting the NLRP3 inflammasome signaling pathway and TLR4/NF-κB signaling pathway in synovial tissue. Multiple omics studies indicated that JFG increased the abundance of gut microbiota and regulated the number of gut bacteria, thereby increased the levels of Acetic acid, Propionic acid, and Butyric acid in the gut and serum of RA rats, which activated AMPK to regulate fatty acid metabolism and fatty acid biosynthesis, thereby inhibited lipid oxidative stress induced ferroptosis to improve tissue damage caused by RA. Meanwhile, JFG improved the intestinal barrier by upregulating the expresses of Claudin 5 and ZO-1, which was confirmed by low concentrations of D-Lactic acid, LPS-SIgA and DAO in serum. CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed that JFG improved the disturbance of fatty acid metabolism by modulating gut microbiota and the production of fecal SCFAs to activate AMPK, and then inhibited ferroptosis caused by lipid oxidative stress in synovium tissue and prevented AR injury. This study proposes for the first time to investigate the mechanism of JFG treatment for RA from the perspective of the "Gut-joint" axis, and provides a promising approach for the treatment of RA.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is a novel treatment for inflammatory diseases. Herein, we assess its safety, efficacy, and immunological impact in patients with moderate-to-severe atopic dermatitis (AD). METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial, we performed the efficacy and safety assessment of FMT for moderate-to-severe adult patients with AD. All patients received FMT or placebo once a week for 3 weeks, in addition to their standard background treatments. Patients underwent disease severity assessments at weeks 0, 1, 2, 4, 8, 12, and 16, and blood and fecal samples were collected for immunologic analysis and metagenomic shotgun sequencing, respectively. Safety was monitored throughout the trial. RESULTS: Improvements in eczema area and severity index (EASI) scores and percentage of patients achieving EASI 50 (50% reduction in EASI score) were greater in patients treated with FMT than in placebo-treated patients. No serious adverse reactions occurred during the trial. FMT treatment decreased the Th2 and Th17 cell proportions among the peripheral blood mononuclear cells, and the levels of TNF-α, and total IgE in serum. By contrast, the expression levels of IL-12p70 and perforin on NK cells were increased. Moreover, FMT altered the abundance of species and functional pathways of the gut microbiota in the patients, especially the abundance of Megamonas funiformis and the pathway for 1,4-dihydroxy-6-naphthoate biosynthesis II. CONCLUSION: FMT was a safe and effective therapy in moderate-to-severe adult patients with AD; the treatment changed the gut microbiota compositions and functions.

More than 50% of patients with hand eczema (HE) are colonized with Staphylococcus aureus. Comprehensive knowledge of the skin microbiome and its changes in patients with HE may provide insights into future potential therapeutical targets. OBJECTIVE: To describe the skin microbiome in patients with moderate-to-severe chronic HE and assess its changes following treatment with topical corticosteroids (TCS). METHODS: Bacterial samples were collected from lesional and nonlesional skin before and after 2 weeks of TCS treatment using ESwabs and analysed by 16S rRNA and tuf gene sequencing. Clinically, the disease severity was assessed by the Hand Eczema Severity Index (HECSI). RESULTS: A cohort of 31 patients with HE were included and followed up. Compared to nonlesional skin, lesional skin differed in overall bacterial community composition (p = 0.02), displayed higher relative abundance of Staphylococcus, in particular S. aureus (p = 0.01) and lower abundance of Micrococcus (p = 0.02). As disease severity improved with treatment, these microbial characteristics on lesional skin shifted towards that of nonlesional skin on the hands. CONCLUSION: The bacterial skin microbiome was altered in lesions of HE and partly driven by S. aureus colonization, however, shifted towards nonlesional skin following treatment. Our results emphasize the future possibilities for anti-S. aureus treatment strategies.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is an inflammatory skin condition characterized by widely variable cutaneous Staphylococcus aureus abundance that contributes to disease severity and rapidly responds to type 2 immune blockade (ie, dupilumab). The molecular mechanisms regulating S aureus levels between AD subjects remain poorly understood. OBJECTIVE: We investigated host genes that may be predictive of S aureus abundance and correspond with AD severity. METHODS: We studied data derived from the National Institutes of Health/National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases-funded (NCT03389893 [ADRN-09]) randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicenter study of dupilumab in adults (n = 71 subjects) with moderate-to-severe AD. Bulk RNA sequencing of skin biopsy samples (n = 57 lesional, 55 nonlesional) was compared to epidermal S aureus abundance, lipidomic, and AD clinical measures. RESULTS: S aureus abundance and ceramide synthase 1 (CERS1) expression positively correlated at baseline across both nonlesional (r = 0.29, P = .030) and lesional (r = 0.41, P = .0015) skin. Lesional CERS1 expression also positively correlated with AD severity (ie, SCORAD r = 0.44, P = .0006) and skin barrier dysfunction (transepidermal water loss area under the curve r = 0.31, P = .025) at baseline. CERS1 expression (forms C18:0 sphingolipids) was negatively associated with elongation of very long-chain fatty acids (ELOVL6; C16:0→C18:0) expression and corresponded with a shorter chain length sphingolipid composition. Dupilumab rapidly reduced CERS1 expression (day 7) and ablated the relationship with S aureus abundance and ELOVL6 expression by day 21. CONCLUSION: CERS1 is a unique molecular biomarker of S aureus abundance and AD severity that may contribute to dysfunctional skin barrier and shorter-chain sphingolipid composition through fatty acid sequestration as a maladaptive compensatory response to reduced ELOVL6.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic, inflammatory disease characterized by dry, pruritic skin. In the U.S., the prevalence of AD has increased over three-fold since the 1970s. We previously reported a geographic association between isocyanate-containing air pollution and AD as well as mechanistic data demonstrating that isocyanates induce skin dysbiosis and activate the host itch receptor TRPA1. However, non-spatial models are susceptible to spatial confounding and may overlook other meaningful associations. METHODS: We added spatial analysis to our prior model, contrasting pollution data with clinical visits. In addition, we conducted a retrospective case-control survey of childhood exposure to BTEX-related products. Finally, we assessed implicated compounds, in pure form and as part of synthetic fabric, for their effect on the growth and metabolism of skin commensal bacteria. RESULTS: Spatial analysis implicate benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and, most significantly, xylene (BTEX) compounds. Survey odds ratios for AD were significant for xylene-derived polyester bed sheets (OR = 9.5; CI 2.2-40.1) and diisocyanate-containing wallpaper adhesive (OR = 6.5; CI 1.5-27.8). Staphylococcus aureus lives longer on synthetic textiles compared to natural textiles. Meanwhile, synthetic fabric exposure shifts the lipid metabolism of health-associated commensals (Roseomonas mucosa and S. epidermidis) away from therapeutic pathways. CONCLUSIONS: We propose that BTEX chemicals in their raw forms and in synthetic products represent a unifying hypothesis for environmentally induced AD flares through their ability to create dysbiosis in the skin microbiota and directly activate TRPA1. Unequal distribution of these pollutants may also influence racial disparities in AD rates.

The skin microbiota maintains a physical and immunological barrier to the environment. Little is known about how the microbiome changes over time or the effect of hand hygiene practices and moisturizer use. OBJECTIVES: To assess sex-specific changes in skin bacteria over time, and how the microbiome is related to self-reported hand eczema, hand hygiene practices and use of moisturizers. METHODS: Swab samples from the dorsal hand were collected at baseline and 6.5 years later during the COVID-19 pandemic, in 168 participants from the RHINESSA study in Bergen, Norway. The skin samples were analysed by 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. RESULTS: The alpha diversity of the hand microbiome increased from baseline to follow-up, and beta diversity differed by sex at both time points. The relative abundance increased for several bacteria from baseline to follow-up, with sex-specific differences. Current hand eczema and aggravating hand eczema during the COVID-19 pandemic were associated with an increase in Staphylococcus. High hand washing frequency at home was associated with lower alpha diversity and with higher abundance of Staphylococcus, Corynebacterium, Finegoldia, and Pseudomonas and lower abundance of Propionibacterium and Pelomonas. The alpha diversity increased with increasing time passing between hand washing and sampling, whereas more frequent moisturizer use was associated with significantly lower alpha diversity, and a change in abundance for some bacteria, such as more Pseudomonas. CONCLUSIONS: This longitudinal study revealed an overall increase in skin microbial diversity over a 6-year period, which was unexpected since follow-up was performed during the COVID-19 pandemic when vigorous hand hygienic practices were introduced. Sex-specific differences were identified at both time points. Individuals with hand eczema seem to develop a more dysbiotic skin bacterial community over time. Hand washing and use of moisturizers, with typically gender-specific habitual patterns, may lead to change in bacterial composition.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a common inflammatory disease of the skin that begins early in life and can be lifelong. The purpose of our study was to evaluate whether fetal exposure and/or early-life exposure of a child to antibiotics increases the risk of early-onset AD. OBJECTIVES: We hypothesize that antibiotic exposure in utero or early in life (e.g. first 90 days) increases the likelihood that children develop AD. METHODS: Utilizing a large, prospectively collected electronic medical records database, we studied the association of antibiotic exposure received in utero or very early in life and the relative risk of onset of AD in a population-based cohort study. Associations were estimated using proportional hazards models as hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). RESULTS: The risk of AD in childhood was increased after in utero or early-life antibiotic exposure. For any in utero antibiotic exposure the HR (CI) was 1.38 (1.36-1.39). However, penicillin demonstrated the strongest association with AD for both in utero exposure [1.43 (1.41-1.44)] and for childhood exposure [1.81 (1.79-1.82)]. HRs were higher in children born to mothers without AD than in those with AD pointing to effect modification by maternal AD status. CONCLUSIONS: Children born to mothers exposed to antibiotics while in utero had, depending on the mother's history of AD, approximately a 20-40% increased risk of developing AD. Depending on the antibiotic, children who received antibiotics early in life had a 40-80% increased risk of developing AD. Our study supports and refines the association between incident AD and antibiotic administration. It also adds population-based support to therapeutic attempts to treat AD by modifying the skin microbiome.

Here, we examine if microbes in the beds of rural and urban infants are associated with later development of atopic diseases. We studied fungi and bacteria in the beds of 6-month-old infants (n = 514) in association with the risk of asthma, allergic rhinitis, eczema and aeroallergen sensitization at 6 years of age in the prospective COPSAC2010 cohort. RESULTS: Both fungal and bacterial diversity were lower in the beds of children, who later developed allergic rhinitis (-0.22 [-0.43,-0.01], padj = .04 and -.24 [-0.42,-0.05], padj = .01 respectively) and lower bacterial richness was discovered in beds of children later developing asthma (-41.34 [-76.95,-5.73], padj = .02) or allergic rhinitis (-45.65 [-81.19,-10.10], padj = .01). Interestingly, higher fungal diversity and richness were discovered in the beds of children developing eczema (0.23 [0.02,0.43], padj = .03 and 29.21 [1.59,56.83], padj = .04 respectively). We defined a limited set of fungal and bacterial genera that predicted rural/urban environment. Some rural-associated bacterial genera such as Romboutsia and Bacillus and fungal genera Spegazzinia and Physcia were also associated with reduced risk of diseases, including eczema. These fungal and bacterial fingerprints predicting the living environment were associated with asthma and allergic rhinitis, but not eczema, with rural compositions being protective. The bed dust bacteria mediated 27% of the protective association of a rural living environment for allergic rhinitis (p = .04). CONCLUSIONS: Bed dust microbes can be differentially associated with airway- and skin-related diseases. The differing bed dust microbiota between rural and urban infants may influence their later risk of asthma and allergic rhinitis.

Systemic treatments for atopic dermatitis (AD) are evaluated primarily in placebo-controlled trials with binary efficacy outcomes. In a living systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA), we previously analysed continuous efficacy measures. OBJECTIVES: To compare binary efficacy outcomes of systemic treatments for AD. METHODS: We searched the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), MEDLINE, Embase, Latin American and Caribbean Health Science Information (LILACS) database, Global Resource for Eczema Trials (GREAT) database and trial registries up to 1 March 2023. We included randomized trials examining ≥ 8 weeks of treatment with systemic immunomodulatory medications for moderate-to-severe AD. We screened titles, abstracts and full texts and abstracted data independently, in duplicate. Outcomes included the proportion of patients achieving at least 50%, 75% and 90% improvements in Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI 50, EASI 75 and EASI 90, respectively) and Investigator Global Assessment (IGA) success. We performed random-effects Bayesian NMAs to calculate odds ratios (OR) and 95% credible intervals (CrIs) between each intervention for each outcome. RESULTS: Eighty-three trials with 22 122 participants were included in the systematic review. In analyses limited to trials of 8-16 weeks' duration with predominantly adult populations, abrocitinib 200 mg daily (OR 1.5, 95% CrI 1.1-2.2) and upadacitinib 15 mg daily (OR 1.7, 95% CrI 0.9-3.3) and 30 mg daily (OR 2.5, 95% CrI 1.3-5.0) were associated with higher odds of achieving EASI 50 vs. dupilumab. Abrocitinib 100 mg daily (OR 0.7, 95% CrI 0.5-1.0), baricitinib 2 mg daily (OR 0.4, 95% CrI 0.3-0.5) and 4 mg daily (OR 0.5, 95% CrI 0.3-0.7), and tralokinumab (OR 0.4, 95% CrI 0.3-0.6) were associated with lower odds of achieving EASI 50 vs. dupilumab. Results were similar for EASI 75, EASI 90 and IGA success. CONCLUSIONS: Supporting results for continuous outcome measures, upadacitinib 30 mg daily and abrocitinib 200 mg daily are the most efficacious with regard to binary efficacy endpoints up to 16 weeks in adults with moderate-to-severe AD, followed by upadacitinib 15 mg daily, dupilumab and abrocitinib 100 mg daily. Dupilumab and both doses of upadacitinib and abrocitinib are more efficacious than baricitinib 4 and 2 mg daily and tralokinumab.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) endotypes differ with ethnicity. We examined the skin microbiota, cytokine and lipid profiles in Greenlandic Inuit and Danish children with AD. METHODS: Twenty-five Inuit children with AD and 25 Inuit control children were clinically examined and compared to previously collected data from 25 Danish children with AD. Skin tape strips and skin swabs were collected from lesional and non-lesional skin. Levels of cutaneous immune biomarkers, free sphingoid bases and their (glycosyl)ceramides were analysed. Skin swabs were analysed with 16S rRNA and tuf gene for characterization of bacterial species communities. RESULTS: Bacterial β-diversity was significantly different between Inuit and Danish AD skin, in both lesional (p < 0.001) and non-lesional (p < 0.001) AD skin, and there was a higher relative abundance of Staphylococcus aureus in Danish compared to Inuit lesional (53% vs. 8%, p < 0.01) and non-lesional skin (55% vs. 5%, p < 0.001). Danish AD children had a higher α-diversity than Inuit children in non-lesional (p < 0.05) but not in lesional skin. Significantly higher levels of type 2 immunity cytokine interleukin (IL)-4 (p < 0.05) and IL-5 (p < 0.01) were identified in Inuit compared to Danish AD children. In contrast, IL-33 (p < 0.01) was higher in Danish lesional and non-lesional AD skin. Higher levels of long-chain glucosylceramide (GlcCER)[S](d26:1) were found in lesional (p < 0.001) and non-lesional (p < 0.001) Inuit skin compared with Danish AD skin. NMF levels were similar in Inuit and Danish AD skin. CONCLUSION: Skin microbiota, cytokine and lipid composition differed significantly between Inuit and Danish children with AD and showed a stronger type 2 immune signature in Inuit children.

A rapid expansion of systemic immunological treatment options for atopic dermatitis (AD) has created a need for clinically relevant and understandable comparative efficacy and safety information for patients and clinicians. Given the scarcity of head-to-head trials, network meta-analysis (NMA) is an alternative way to enable robust comparisons among treatment options; however, NMA results are often complex and difficult to directly implement in shared decision-making. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to develop a website that effectively presents the results of a living systematic review and NMA on AD treatments to patient and clinician users. METHODS: We conducted a multimethod study using iterative feedback from adults with AD, adult caregivers of children with AD, dermatologists, and allergists within a user-centered design framework. We used questionnaires followed by workshops among patients and clinicians to develop and improve the website interface. Usability testing was done with a caregiver of a patient with eczema. RESULTS: Questionnaires were completed by 31 adults with AD or caregivers and 94 clinicians. Patients and caregivers felt it was very important to know about new treatments (20/31, 65%). Clinicians felt the lack of evidence-based comparisons between treatments was a barrier to care (55/93, 59%). "Avoiding dangerous side effects" was ranked as the most important priority for patients (weighted ranking 5.2/7, with higher ranking being more important), and "improving patients' overall symptoms" was the most important priority for clinicians (weighted ranking 5.0/6). A total of 4 patients and 7 clinicians participated in workshops; they appreciated visualizations of the NMA results and found the website valuable for comparing different treatments. The patients suggested changes to simplify the interface and clarify terminology related to comparative efficacy. The user in the usability testing found the website intuitive to navigate. CONCLUSIONS: We developed a website, "eczematherapies.com," with a user-centered design approach. Visualizations of NMA results enable users to compare treatments as part of their shared decision-making process.

Atopic dermatitis is a common chronic, relapsing, and remitting inflammatory skin disorder associated with cutaneous dysbiosis. Current treatment options often fail to adequately control the disease and have unfavorable safety profiles. There is a need for new options that address these treatment shortcomings. OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to evaluate the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of FB-401, a live therapeutic product of 3 strains of Roseomonas mucosa, compared to matching placebo applied topically 3 times per week to participants ages ≥2 years of age with mild-to-moderate atopic dermatitis. METHODS: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group study was conducted. The primary outcome was the proportion of participants with 50% improvement in Eczema Area and Severity Index score from baseline at week 16. 154 subjects aged 2 or older with a clinical diagnosis of atopic dermatitis as defined by Hanifin and Rajka criteria with mild or moderate severity were randomized 1:1 via interactive web response system to FB-401 or placebo. RESULTS: The proportion of subjects who achieved the primary outcome was similar between both treatment groups, with no significant treatment group differences observed at any post-baseline visit. The number of treatment-emergent adverse events and the number of subjects with at least one were similar across treatment groups. One serious adverse event not related to treatment was reported. No treatment-emergent adverse events led to treatment discontinuation or study discontinuation. CONCLUSIONS: FB-401 showed an acceptable safety profile but failed to prove superior to placebo in treating children and adults with mild-to-moderate atopic dermatitis.

While the microbiome is increasingly seen as a targetable contributor to atopic dermatitis (AD), questions remain as to whether the dysbiosis is secondary to diseased skin or if it predates symptom onset. Previous work has evaluated how the skin microbiome changes with age and established the influence of factors like delivery mode and breastfeeding on global microbiome diversity. However, these studies were unable to identify taxa which predict subsequent AD. METHODS: Skin swab samples were collected from the first week of life for 72 children in the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) at a single site hospital. Participants were followed for 3 years to determine their health status. We applied shotgun metagenomic sequencing to assess the microbiome differences between 31 children who went on to develop AD and 41 controls. RESULTS: We identified that subsequent development of AD was associated with differential abundance of several bacterial and fungal taxa as well as several metabolic pathways, each of which have been previously associated with active AD. CONCLUSIONS: Our work provides evidence of reproducibility for the previously reported dysbiotic signatures predating AD onset while also expanding prior findings through the first use of metagenomic assessment prior to AD onset. While extrapolation of our findings beyond the pre-term, NICU cohort is limited, our findings add to the evidence that the dysbiosis associated with AD pre-dates disease onset rather than reflect a secondary consequence of skin inflammation.

Adolescent patients (N = 206) (≥ 12 to < 18 years old, weighing ≥ 40 kg) with moderate-to-severe AD received subcutaneous lebrikizumab 500 mg loading doses at baseline and Week 2, followed by 250 mg every 2 weeks (Q2W) thereafter. Safety was monitored using reported AEs, AEs leading to treatment discontinuation, vital signs, growth assessments, and laboratory testing. Efficacy analyses included Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI), Investigator's Global Assessment (IGA), Body Surface Area (BSA), (Children's) Dermatology Life Quality Index ((C)DLQI), and Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Anxiety, and PROMIS Depression. RESULTS: 172 patients completed the treatment period. Low frequencies of SAEs (n = 5, 2.4%) and AEs leading to treatment discontinuation (n = 5, 2.4%) were reported. Overall, 134 patients (65%) reported at least one treatment-emergent AE (TEAE), most being mild or moderate in severity. In total, 62.6% achieved IGA (0,1) with ≥ 2-point improvement from baseline and 81.9% achieved EASI-75 by Week 52. The EASI mean percentage improvement from baseline to Week 52 was 86.0%. Mean BSA at baseline was 45.4%, decreasing to 8.4% by Week 52. Improvements in mean change from baseline (CFB) to Week 52 were observed in DLQI (baseline 12.3; CFB - 8.9), CDLQI (baseline 10.1; CFB - 6.5), PROMIS Anxiety (baseline 51.5; CFB - 6.3), and PROMIS Depression (baseline 49.3; CFB - 3.4) scores. CONCLUSIONS: Lebrikizumab 250 mg Q2W had a safety profile consistent with previous trials and significantly improved AD symptoms and quality of life, with meaningful responses at Week 16 increasing by Week 52. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier, NCT04250350.

Emollients are the baseline treatment for mild or moderate atopic dermatitis (AD) to improve the epidermal barrier and provide anti-irritant and anti-pruritic effects. Emollient 'plus' can influence the skin microbiome of atopic eczema patients. OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the benefits of using Emollient 'plus' to reduce corticosteroid consumption. METHODS: In an open, single-centre, randomized, controlled study, patients with mild to moderate AD (Severity scoring of AD [SCORAD] score 20-30) were randomized 1:1 to apply the Emollient 'plus' twice daily for 28 days or to continue with their usual classical emollient (Control group). In addition, each patient received topical corticosteroids to use when necessary and according to the dermatologist's prescription. Assessments included SCORAD, PO-SCORAD, local SCORAD, quality of life questionnaires, and tolerability. RESULTS: A total of 119 patients were included in the PP population with a mean age of 26.50 ± 17.5 years old (min-max 3-71 years). Between baseline and day 28, the mean amount of corticosteroid used was lower for the Emollient 'plus' versus Control group (6.03 vs. 9.16 g; p = 0.041) and corticosteroid was applied on fewer days (37.5% vs. 46.9% of days; p = 0.0256) with fewer applications per day (0.55 vs. 0.71 applications per day; p = 0.0203). Similar improvements were observed in both groups for SCORAD, PO-SCORAD, local SCORAD, skin sensation score, AD burden scale, patient benefit index >1, as well as subject and investigator efficacy and tolerability questionnaire assessments. CONCLUSIONS: Between baseline and day 28, there was significant corticosteroid-sparing in the Emollient 'plus' group compared to the Control group in quantity, number of applications per day and number of days of use, whilst efficacy was maintained with no significant differences between the two groups for all clinical evaluations, as well as for tolerability.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) patients display an altered skin microbiome which may not only be an indicator but also a driver of inflammation. We aimed to investigate associations among AD patients' skin microbiome, clinical data, and response to systemic therapy in patients of the TREATgermany registry. METHODS: Skin swabs of 157 patients were profiled with 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing before and after 3 months of treatment with dupilumab or cyclosporine. For comparison, 16s microbiome data from 258 population-based healthy controls were used. Disease severity was assessed using established instruments such as the Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI). RESULTS: We confirmed the previously shown correlation of Staphylococcus aureus abundance and bacterial alpha diversity with AD severity as measured by EASI. Therapy with Dupilumab shifted the bacterial community toward the pattern seen in healthy controls. The relative abundance of Staphylococci and in particular S. aureus significantly decreased on both lesional and non-lesional skin, whereas the abundance of Staphylococcus hominis increased. These changes were largely independent from the degree of clinical improvement and were not observed for cyclosporine. CONCLUSIONS: Systemic treatment with dupilumab but not cyclosporine tends to restore a healthy skin microbiome largely independent of the clinical response indicating potential effects of IL-4RA blockade on the microbiome.

Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disorder characterized by pruritus and eczema lesions and psychiatric comorbidities. The gut-brain-skin axis plays a pivotal role during AD development, which might suggest a novel therapeutic strategy for AD. The present study aims to uncover the protective effects and underlying mechanisms of fructo-oligofructose (FOS), a type of prebiotic, on AD-like skin manifestations and comorbid anxiety and depression in AD mice. RESULTS: Female Kunming mice were treated topically with 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB) to induce AD-like symptoms and FOS was administered daily for 14 days. The results showed that FOS could alleviate AD-like skin lesions markedly as evidenced by dramatic decreases in severity score, scratching bouts, the levels of immunoglobulin E (IgE) and T helper 1(Th1)/Th2-related cytokines, and the infiltration of inflammatory cells and mast cells to the dermal tissues. The comorbid anxiety and depressive-like behaviors, estimated by the forced swimming test (FST), the tail-suspension test (TST), the open-field test (OFT), and the zero maze test (ZMT) in AD mice, were significantly attenuated by FOS. Fructo-oligofructose significantly upregulated brain neurotransmitters levels of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and dopamine (DA). Furthermore, FOS treatment increased the relative abundance of gut microbiota, such as Prevotella and Lactobacillus and the concentrations of short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), especially acetate and iso-butyrate in the feces of AD mice. The correlation analysis indicated that the reshaped gut microbiome composition and enhanced SCFAs formation are associated with skin inflammation and behavioral alteration. CONCLUSION: Collectively, these data identify FOS as a promising microbiota-targeted treatment for AD-like skin inflammation and comorbid anxiety and depressive-like behaviors. © 2023 Society of Chemical Industry.

We performed a literature search to identify CPGs published between October 2014 and April 2021, using the following databases: MEDLINE, Embase, National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), Guidelines International Network, Emergency Care Research Institute guidelines trust, Australian CPGs, Turning Research Into Practice database and DynaMed. The systematic review was conducted and reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses framework. Three critical appraisal tools were used: Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and Evaluation (AGREE) II instrument, Lenzer's red flags and United States Institute of Medicine's (IOM) criteria of trustworthiness. RESULTS: In total, six AA CPGs from seven manuscripts (one CPG was in two parts published in separate papers) were included. The majority (four of six) of the CPGs focused on treatment. Four CPGs (total of five papers) were in English and two CPGs were only available in the original language (one Russian and one Japanese). All AA CPGs demonstrated low quality in several domains in the AGREE II appraisal, including stakeholder involvement and applicability, with the latter being deemed the worst domain for all CPGs, with an average of 29%. The mean (SD) number of Lenzer's red flags for the included CPGs was 3.4 (1.5) out of a total of 8 possible red flags, while the IOM criteria showed 1.6 (0.8) 'fully met' criteria and 3.1 (1.2) 'not met' out of a total of 9 criteria. CONCLUSION: We found a limited number of AA CPGs, all of which had significant methodological deficiencies. We encourage guideline development groups to use validated checklists/tools to develop reliable and trustworthy CPGs.

Acute cutaneous inflammation causes microbiome alterations as well as ultrastructural changes in epidermis stratification. However, the interactions between keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation status and the skin microbiome have not been fully explored. OBJECTIVES: Hypothesizing that the skin microbiome contributes to regulation of keratinocyte differentiation and can modify antimicrobial responses, we examined the effect of exposure to commensal (Staphylococcus epidermidis, SE) or pathogenic (Staphylococcus aureus, SA) challenge on epidermal models. METHODS: Explant biopsies were taken to investigate species-specific antimicrobial effects of host factors. Further investigations were performed in reconstituted epidermal models by bulk transcriptomic analysis alongside secreted protein profiling. Single-cell RNA sequencing analysis was performed to explore the keratinocyte populations responsible for SA inflammation. A dataset of 6391 keratinocytes from control (2044 cells), SE challenge (2028 cells) and SA challenge (2319 cells) was generated from reconstituted epidermal models. RESULTS: Bacterial lawns of SA, not SE, were inhibited by human skin explant samples, and microarray analysis of three-dimensional epidermis models showed that host antimicrobial peptide expression was induced by SE but not SA. Protein analysis of bacterial cocultured models showed that SA exposure induced inflammatory mediator expression, indicating keratinocyte activation of other epidermal immune populations. Single-cell DropSeq analysis of unchallenged naive, SE-challenged and SA-challenged epidermis models was undertaken to distinguish cells from basal, spinous and granular layers, and to interrogate them in relation to model exposure. In contrast to SE, SA specifically induced a subpopulation of spinous cells that highly expressed transcripts related to epidermal inflammation and antimicrobial response. Furthermore, SA, but not SE, specifically induced a basal population that highly expressed interleukin-1 alarmins. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that SA-associated remodelling of the epidermis is compartmentalized to different keratinocyte populations. Elucidating the mechanisms regulating bacterial sensing-triggered inflammatory responses within tissues will enable further understanding of microbiome dysbiosis and inflammatory skin diseases, such as atopic eczema.

Few data exist on differences in treatment effectiveness and safety in atopic dermatitis patients of different skin types. OBJECTIVE: To investigate treatment outcomes of dupilumab, methotrexate, and ciclosporin, and morphological phenotypes in atopic dermatitis patients, stratified by Fitzpatrick skin type. METHODS: In an observational prospective cohort study, pooling data from the Dutch TREAT (TREatment of ATopic eczema) NL (treatregister.nl) and UK-Irish A-STAR (Atopic eczema Systemic TherApy Register; astar-register.org) registries, data on morphological phenotypes and treatment outcomes were investigated. RESULTS: A total of 235 patients were included (light skin types [LST]: Fitzpatrick skin type 1-3, n = 156 [Ethnicity, White: 94.2%]; dark skin types [DST]: skin type 4-6, n = 68 [Black African/Afro-Caribbean: 25%, South-Asian: 26.5%, and Hispanics: 0%]). DST were younger (19.5 vs 29.0 years; P < .001), more often had follicular eczema (22.1% vs 2.6%; P < .001), higher baseline Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) scores (20.1 vs 14.9; P = .009), less allergic contact dermatitis (30.9% vs 47.4%; P = .03), and less previous phototherapy use (39.7% vs 59.0%; P = .008). When comparing DST and LST corrected for covariates including baseline EASI, DST showed greater mean EASI reduction between baseline and 6 months with only dupilumab (16.7 vs 9.7; adjusted P = .032). No differences were found for adverse events for any treatments (P > .05). LIMITATIONS: Unblinded, non-randomized. CONCLUSION: Atopic dermatitis differs in several characteristics between LST and DST. Skin type may influence treatment effectiveness of dupilumab.

2 groups of 30 patients with chronic moderate course of microbial eczema in the acute stage were examined. In the comparison group, therapy was carried out in accordance with the Federal Clinical Guidelines (antihistamines, detoxification, systemic antibacterial drugs, external combined agents, including a corticosteroid and an antibiotic). Patients of the main group received similar therapy without systemic antibiotics. In addition, to influence the pathogenic microflora of the skin in the lesion in the main group, procedures with supratonal alternating current of low strength were also used. The control group consisted of 30 healthy volunteers. The results were evaluated according to the clinical picture, laboratory parameters of bacteriological examination. RESULTS: During therapy, in patients of the main group and in the comparison group, a positive dynamics of the skin pathological process was noted, and a decrease in microbial colonization of the skin in the lesions of microbial eczema was observed by 4 and 3 times, respectively (p<0.05). CONCLUSION: The proposed method of treatment is not inferior in terms of the effectiveness of traditional therapy, allows to achieve positive clinical dynamics in similar terms, as well as to avoid the widespread use of systemic antibacterial drugs in cases of moderate dermatosis.

The pathophysiology of atopic dermatitis (AD) is multifactorial, influenced by genetics, skin barrier dysfunction, and environmental stressors. There is a lack of research comparing the etiologies and pathologic mechanisms accounting for differences in facial vs body eczema. OBJECTIVES: To explore reasons why facial eczema may differ from body eczema. RESULTS: There are key differences in the environments of the face and body that may lead to AD exacerbation. These include differences in the skin microbiome, sebaceous glands concentration, and levels of natural moisturizing factor. The face is exposed to more environmental stress compared with the rest of the body. These stresses include aeroallergens, ultraviolet radiation, and cosmetic products. Management of facial eczema also differs from that of body eczema due to the avoidance of high potency topical steroids on the face. Topical steroids increase microbiome diversity, and lack of topical steroid use on the face can lead to decreased microbiome diversity and increased AD severity. CONCLUSION: Facial and body eczema differ due to differences seen in anatomical structure and environmental exposures. These differences should be further researched and used in the management of facial vs body eczema and can also be used in the development of new AD treatments. J Drugs Dermatol. 2022;21(10): 1119-1123. doi:10.36849/JDD.6354.

The TREatment of ATopic eczema (TREAT) Registry Taskforce is a collaborative international network of registries collecting data of atopic eczema (AE) patients receiving systemic and phototherapy with the common goal to provide long-term real-world data on the effectiveness, safety and cost-effectiveness of therapies. A core dataset, consisting of domains and domain items with corresponding measurement instruments, has been developed to harmonize data collection. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to give an overview of the status and characteristics of the eight established TREAT registries, and to perform a mapping exercise to examine the degree of overlap and pooling ability between the national registry datasets. This will allow us to determine which research questions can be answered in the future by pooling data. METHODS: All eight registries were asked to share their dataset and information on the current status and characteristics. The overlap between the core dataset and each registry dataset was identified (according to the domains, domain items and measurement instruments of the TREAT core dataset). RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: A total of 4702 participants have been recruited in the eight registries as of 1st of May 2022. Of the 69 core dataset domain items, data pooling was possible for 69 domain item outcomes in TREAT NL (the Netherlands), 61 items in A-STAR (UK and Ireland), 38 items in TREATgermany (Germany), 36 items in FIRST (France), 33 items in AtopyReg (Italy), 29 items in Biobadatop (Spain), 28 items in SCRATCH (Denmark) and 20 items in SwedAD (Sweden). Pooled analyses across all registries can be performed on multiple important domain items, covering the main aims of analysing data on the (cost-)effectiveness and safety of AE therapies. These results will facilitate future comparative or joint analyses.

The complete clinical data of 162 cases of IE presented between July 2019 and July 2020 to the First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University were retrospectively analyzed. Children treated by CTZ alone were assigned to the control group (n = 81) and those by CTZ plus bifid triple viable capsules were included in the observation group (n = 81). Therapeutic efficacy, adverse reactions (ARs), disease recurrence, as well as changes in GMB, inflammatory factors (IFs) and immunoglobulins (Igs) were observed. RESULTS: The observation group was observed with a higher overall response rate and increased fecal Lactobacillus, Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Bifidobacterium counts after treatment versus the control group. After treatment, reduced IgG and IgM, as well as IFs, were found in both groups, with lower levels in the observation group. A lower incidence of ARs was determined in the observation group. CONCLUSION: With high efficacy for the treatment of IE, bifid triple viable capsules plus CTZ can validly regulate the GMB of children, improve their immune function and clinical symptoms, and reduce the disease recurrence rate, which is worthy of clinical promotion.

Since changes in the national guidance in 2011, prophylactic antibiotics for women undergoing caesarean section are recommended prior to skin incision, rather than after the baby's umbilical cord has been clamped. Evidence from randomised controlled trials conducted outside the UK has shown that this reduces maternal infectious morbidity; however, the prophylactic antibiotics also cross the placenta, meaning that babies are exposed to them around the time of birth. Antibiotics are known to affect the gut microbiota of the babies, but the long-term effects of exposure to high-dose broad-spectrum antibiotics around the time of birth on allergy and immune-related diseases are unknown. OBJECTIVES: We aimed to examine whether or not in-utero exposure to antibiotics immediately prior to birth compared with no pre-incisional antibiotic exposure increases the risk of (1) asthma and (2) eczema in children born by caesarean section. DESIGN: This was a controlled interrupted time series study. SETTING: The study took place in primary and secondary care. PARTICIPANTS: Children born in the UK during 2006-18 delivered by caesarean section were compared with a control cohort delivered vaginally. INTERVENTIONS: In-utero exposure to antibiotics immediately prior to birth. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Asthma and eczema in children in the first 5 years of life. Additional secondary outcomes, including other allergy-related conditions, autoimmune diseases, infections, other immune system-related diseases and neurodevelopmental conditions, were also assessed. DATA SOURCES: The Health Improvement Network (THIN) and the Clinical Practice Research Datalink (CPRD) primary care databases and the Hospital Episode Statistics (HES) database. Previously published linkage strategies were adapted to link anonymised data on mothers and babies in these databases. Duplicate practices contributing to both THIN and the CPRD databases were removed to create a THIN-CPRD data set. RESULTS: In the THIN-CPRD and HES data sets, records of 515,945 and 3,945,351 mother-baby pairs were analysed, respectively. The risk of asthma was not significantly higher in children born by caesarean section exposed to pre-incision antibiotics than in children whose mothers received post-cord clamping antibiotics, with an incidence rate ratio of 0.91 (95% confidence interval 0.78 to 1.05) for diagnosis of asthma in primary care and an incidence rate ratio of 1.05 (95% confidence interval 0.99 to 1.11) for asthma resulting in a hospital admission. We also did not find an increased risk of eczema, with an incidence rate ratio of 0.98 (95% confidence interval 0.94 to1.03) and an incidence rate ratio of 0.96 (95% confidence interval 0.71 to 1.29) for diagnosis in primary care and hospital admissions, respectively. LIMITATIONS: It was not possible to ascertain the exposure to pre-incision antibiotics at an individual level. The maximum follow-up of children was 5 years. CONCLUSIONS: There was no evidence that the policy change from post-cord clamping to pre-incision prophylactic antibiotics for caesarean sections during 2006-18 had an impact on the incidence of asthma and eczema in early childhood in the UK. FUTURE WORK: There is a need for further research to investigate if pre-incision antibiotics have any impact on developing asthma and other allergy and immune-related conditions in older children. STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as researchregistry3736. FUNDING: This project was funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Health Technology Assessment programme and will be published in full in Health Technology Assessment; Vol. 26, No. 30. See the NIHR Journals Library website for further project information.

From the Growing Up in Singapore Toward healthy Outcomes (GUSTO) cohort, a sub-cohort of 75 participants was recruited. Scheduled questionnaire data was collected for cumulative prevalence of physician-diagnosed eczema, wheezing with the use of nebuliser, and allergen sensitization till the age of 8 years. Stool samples collected at week 3 and months 3, 6 and 12 were quantitated for 9 SCFAs using LC/MS/MS. SCFA data were grouped into lower (below the 25th) and higher (above the 75th percentiles) categories. Generalized Linear Mixed Models was employed to analyse longitudinal association between SCFAs and atopy-related outcomes. RESULTS: Children with lower stool butyric acid levels (≤25th percentile) over the first 3 time points had higher odds ratio (OR) for wheezing (adjOR = 14.6), eczema (adjOR = 13.2), food sensitization (adjOR = 12.3) and combined outcomes of both wheezing and eczema (adjOR = 22.6) till age 8 years, compared to those with higher levels (≥75 percentile). Additionally, lower longitudinal levels of propionic acid (≤25th percentile) over 4 time points in first year of life was associated with recurrent wheezing (≥2 episodes) till 8 years (adjOR = 7.4) (adj p < 0.05). CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that relatively low levels of gut SCFAs in early life are associated with increased susceptibility to atopic-related outcomes in childhood.

The skin barrier represents an entry point for allergic sensitization and TH2-mediated allergic disorders. Results from clinical trials designed to improve microbiome complexity and reduce S aureus colonization, provide skin barrier enhancement, and deliver epicutaneous immunotherapy are summarized and discussed in the context of primary, secondary, and tertiary prevention of allergic disease. CONCLUSION: The skin barrier is a promising target for prevention of allergic disease, though clinical trial results thus far have been mixed, at best.

Epidemiological studies suggest a link between eczema and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), but underlying mechanisms have not been examined. OBJECTIVE: We aim to investigate the association between eczema and subsequent ADHD symptoms in the Growing Up in Singapore Towards healthy Outcomes cohort and explore the role of pro-inflammatory cytokines and gut microbiome. METHODS: The modified International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood questionnaire and Computerized Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Version IV were administered to assess reported eczema within the first 18 months and presence of ADHD symptoms at 54 months, respectively. Skin prick testing at 18 months, cytokines in maternal blood during pregnancy and cord blood and the mediating role of the gut microbiome at 24 months were assessed. RESULTS: After adjusting for confounders, eczema with or without a positive skin prick test was associated with doubling the risk of ADHD symptoms. No differences in maternal and cord blood cytokines were observed in children with and without eczema, or children with and without ADHD. Gut microbiome dysbiosis was observed in children with eczema and children with ADHD. Children with eczema also had lower gut bacterial Shannon diversity. However, the relationship between eczema and ADHD was not mediated by gut microbiome. CONCLUSION: Early life eczema diagnosis is associated with a higher risk of subsequent ADHD symptoms in children. We found no evidence for underlying inflammatory mechanism or mediation by gut microbiome dysbiosis. Further research should evaluate other mechanisms underlying the link between eczema and ADHD. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: [https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01174875], identifier [NCT01174875].

Since October 2019, 21 new studies were added, for a total of 60 trials with 16 579 patients. Up to 16 weeks of treatment in adults, abrocitinib, 200 mg daily (mean difference [MD], 2.2; 95% credible interval [CrI], 0.2-4.0; high certainty) and upadacitinib, 30 mg daily (MD, 2.7; 95% CrI, 0.6-4.7; high certainty) were associated with reduced EASI slightly more than dupilumab, 600 mg then 300 mg every 2 weeks. Abrocitinib, 100 mg daily (MD, -2.1; 95% CrI, -4.1 to -0.3; high certainty), baricitinib, 4 mg daily (MD, -3.2; 95% CrI, -5.7 to -0.8; high certainty), baricitinib, 2 mg daily (MD, -5.2; 95% CrI, -7.5 to -2.9; high certainty) and tralokinumab, 600 mg then 300 mg every 2 weeks (MD, -3.5; 95% CrI, -5.8 to -1.3; high certainty) were associated with reduced EASI slightly less than dupilumab. There was little or no difference between upadacitinib, 15 mg daily, and dupilumab (MD, 0.2; 95% CrI, -1.9 to 2.2; high certainty). The pattern of results was similar for POEM, DLQI, and PP-NRS. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this systematic review and meta-analysis, abrocitinib, 200 mg; and upadacitinib, 30 mg daily, were associated with slightly better scores than dupilumab, and upadacitinib, 15 mg daily, was associated with similar scores to dupilumab. Abrocitinib, 100 mg daily, baricitinib, 4 mg and 2 mg daily, and tralokinumab, 300 mg, every 2 weeks were associated with slightly worse scores.

This study included 144 patients (70 with acne vulgaris, 6 with pityriasis folliculorum, 15 with seborrheic dermatitis, 39 with rosacea, 8 with eczema, and 6 with perioral dermatitis) and 73 healthy subjects. We evaluated Demodex positivity using the standard superficial skin biopsy method in all groups. The presence of more than five Demodex mites per square centimeter was considered positive at the diagnosis. RESULTS: Of the 144 patients included in the study, 107 (74.3%) were female, and 37 (25.7%) were male, while 40 (54.8%) of the 73 healthy subjects were female, and 33 (45.2%) were male. Twenty-one patients (14.5%) and five of the healthy subjects (6.8%) tested positive for Demodex. We found that Demodex positivity rates in the rosacea and acne vulgaris groups were higher than in the control group. However, this level was not statistically significant (p>0.05). We found the highest positivity rate among the patient groups in the pityriasis folliculorum (4/6, 66.7%), rosacea (8/39, 20.5%), and perioral dermatitis (1/6, 16.7%) groups. Lastly, we found no statistically significant relationship between the demographic and clinical characteristics of the groups and Demodex positivity (p>0.05). CONCLUSION: The present study is the only study that investigated Demodex positivity in six different dermatological diseases. Based on the results, we believe that investigating Demodex spp. positivity in dermatological diseases such as acne vulgaris, rosacea, and pityriasis folliculorum would be beneficial for early diagnosis and treatment.

Clinical trials of systemic therapies for atopic dermatitis (AD) often exclude patients based on age and comorbidities. OBJECTIVES: We conducted a scoping review of observational studies and survey of International Eczema Council (IEC) members on the treatment of AD in patients with liver disease, renal disease, viral hepatitis, HIV, or history of malignancy. METHODS: We searched MEDLINE via Ovid, Embase via Ovid, and Web of Science from inception to September 14, 2020. We mapped the available evidence on the use of cyclosporine, methotrexate, azathioprine, mycophenolate, systemic corticosteroids, and dupilumab for AD in older adults (≥65 years) and adults with the previously mentioned comorbidities. We surveyed IEC members on their preferred systemic medications for each patient population. RESULTS: We identified 25 studies on the use of systemic medications in special populations of adults with AD. Although IEC members preferred dupilumab as the first-line systemic agent across all special populations, many could not identify viable third-line systemic therapy options for some populations. CONCLUSIONS: Data on systemic therapy for AD for older adults and adults with comorbidities are limited. Although IEC members' access to systemic therapies differs geographically, expert opinion suggests that dupilumab is preferred for those patients.

Interactions between the skin barrier, immune system, and microbiome underlie the development of atopic dermatitis (AD). OBJECTIVE: To investigate the skin and nasal microbiome in relation to filaggrin gene (FLG) mutations. METHODS: A cross-sectional study including 77 children with difficult-to-treat AD. The entire encoding region of FLG was screened for mutations using single molecule molecular inversion probes and next-generation sequencing. Bacterial swabs from the anterior nares, lesional and nonlesional skin were analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing. For skin samples, additional qPCR was performed for Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus epidermidis. RESULTS: The prevalence of patients with a mutation in FLG was 40%, including 10 different mutations. Analyzing bacterial swabs from all three niches showed a significant effect for both niche and FLG mutation status on the overall microbiome composition. Using a subset analysis to test the effect of FLG mutation status per niche separately did not show a significant association to the microbiome. Shannon diversity and S. aureus abundance were significantly affected by the niche, but not by the presence of an FLG mutation. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest only a minor role for FLG mutation status on the overall microbiome, which is rather caused by differences in the present genera than by microbe richness and evenness.

Owing to the distinctive advantages of mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes (MSCs-exo), these vesicles have emerged as a pivotal research focus in regenerative medicine, surpassing their MSC counterparts. Quercetin (Qr), widely recognized for its potent anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activities, demonstrates substantial potential in enhancing tissue repair processes. This study delves into the role of quercetin-pretreated MSC-derived exosomes (MSCsQr-exo) in accelerating the healing of diabetic wounds. METHODS: MSCsQr-exo were isolated from quercetin-pretreated MSCs and applied to fibroblasts to evaluate changes in cell function. An in vitro DSW rat model was also developed, and the rats were treated with MSCsQr-exo to assess wound healing progression. Fecal samples were collected for 16S rRNA sequencing and untargeted metabolomics to analyze changes in gut microbiota and metabolic profiles. RESULTS: MSCsQr-exo significantly enhanced fibroblast proliferation and migration while improving the therapeutic efficacy of MSCs-exo in DSW treatment. Gut microbiota and metabolomic analyses revealed marked changes in DSW rats, with MSCsQr-exo effectively alleviating dysbiosis. MSCsQr-exo upregulated Faecalibacterium abundance and regulated arachidonic acid metabolism in both the arachidonic and linoleic acid pathways. Firmicutes and Enterobacteriaceae influenced the arachidonic acid pathway by modulating 14.15-EET expression levels. CONCLUSION: MSCsQr-exo facilitate DSW wound healing through modulation of dysbiotic gut microbiota linked to DSW pathology. This discovery offers novel therapeutic avenues and research trajectories for enhancing DSW recovery.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is a growing health concern and the risk of its development is connected with the increasing prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MetS) which occurs as a result of some complex obesity-induced metabolic changes. It is a common chronic liver disease characterized by excessive fat accumulation in the liver, the tendency to progress to more severe forms, and a corresponding increase in morbidity and mortality. Thus, effectively addressing the rising burden of the disease requires a thorough understanding of its complex interrelationship with obesity and MetS. MAIN BODY: MASLD results from complex interactions involving obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidaemia, leading to hepatic lipid accumulation, and is influenced by several genetic and environmental factors such as diet and gut microbiota dysbiosis. It has extensive metabolic and non-metabolic implications, including links to MetS components like hyperglycaemia, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia, and progresses to significant liver damage and other extra-hepatic risks like cardiovascular disease and certain cancers. Diagnosis often relies on imaging and histology, with non-invasive methods preferred over liver biopsies. Emerging biomarkers and OMIC technologies offer improved diagnostic capabilities but face practical challenges. Advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), lifestyle interventions, and pharmacological treatments show promise, with future efforts focusing on precision medicine and novel diagnostic tools to improve patient outcome. CONCLUSION: Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the development of MASLD within the context of metabolic syndrome (MetS) is essential for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Advancements in non-invasive diagnostic tools and novel pharmacological treatments, hold promise for improving the management of MASLD. Future research should focus on precision medicine and innovative therapies to effectively address the disease and its consequences.

The gut microbiome has been reported to induce epigenetic modifications in the host, which may be involved in the pathophysiology of metabolic diseases. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential interactions between the gut microbiome and DNA methylome in subjects with different metabolic characteristics. METHODS: Sixty-four participants with different metabolic characteristics (i.e., participants without obesity -healthy controls-, and participants with obesity and normal insulin sensitivity/insulin resistance/ type 2 diabetes-T2DM-) were included in this study. A machine learning approach was performed in order to identify distinctive patterns in three omics (gut microbiome, blood DNA methylome, and visceral adipose tissue-VAT- DNA methylome) according to the different study groups. RESULTS: Robust distinctive distribution patterns of the three different omics were found between healthy controls and patients with obesity; participants with and without T2DM, and patients with obesity with and without insulin resistance. Importantly, strong correlations between the gut microbiome (including Odoribacteriaceae and Christensenllaceae families) and both blood and VAT DNA methylome were found. Moreover, in the entire study population, three main bacterial genera (Sutterella, Collinsella and Eubacterium) were related to the epigenetic regulation of different genes involved in distinct processes related to cellular metabolism and metabolic diseases, including small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) transferase activity or lipid binding. CONCLUSION: We show that distinctive interactions between the gut microbiome and DNA methylome may occur in subjects with different metabolic characteristics. Further research is needed to elucidate the potential role of these interactions in the pathophysiology of obesity and related comorbidities.

We retrieved articles published between 2014 and 2024 from the Web of Science database and analyzed them using R software, VOSviewer, and CiteSpace. RESULTS: A total of 2,806 articles were included in this study. Research on the relationship between the MedDiet and DM showed a steady increase in publication volume from 2014 to 2019, followed by a sharp rise from 2020 to 2023. Spain was the leading country in terms of publication volume, followed by Italy, the United States, China, and Greece. Spain also led in international collaborations, with CIBER-Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red and Harvard University being the most prominent collaboration centers. Nutrients was the most frequently published and cited journal in this field. Common keywords in this literature included components such as olive oil, legumes, and red wine. Mechanisms studied in this field primarily focused on antioxidant effects, improvements in insulin sensitivity and secretion, regulation of lipid metabolism, and modulation of gut microbiota. CONCLUSION: Research on the beneficial effects of the MedDiet on DM patients has garnered significant attention from researchers worldwide, and it is expected to become a major focus for future DM prevention and treatment. This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the current status and research hotspots regarding the relationship between the MedDiet and DM, offering valuable references for future research.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD), formerly known as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), is becoming the most common chronic liver disease. The gut microbiome is regarded to play a crucial role in MAFLD, but the specific changes of gut microbiome, especially fungi, in different stages of MAFLD are not well understood. This study aimed to observe the longitudinal changes of colon bacteria and fungi of mice at different feeding duration of a high-fat and high-fructose diet (HFHFD), and explore the association between the changes and the progression of MAFLD. METHODS: Twenty-eight male C57BL6J mice were randomly assigned to the normal diet (ND) group and HFHFD group. At the 8th and 16th weeks, mice were sacrificed to compare the diversity, composition, and co-abundance network of bacteria and fungi in colon contents among groups. RESULTS: HFHFD-8W mice exhibited increases in Candida and Dorea, and decreases in Oscillospira and Prevotella in comparison to ND-8W mice, HFHFD-16W mice had increases in Bacteroides, Candida, Desulfovibrio, Dorea, Lactobacillus, and Rhodotorula, and decreases in Akkermansia, Aspergillus, Sterigmatomyces, and Vishniacozyma in comparison to ND-16W mice. And compared to HFHFD-8W mice, HFHFD-16W mice had increases in Desulfovibrio, Lactobacillus, Penicillium, and Rhodotorula, and decreases in Talaromyces and Wallemia. Spearman and GEE correlation analysis revealed that Bacteroides, Candida, Desulfovibrio, and Lactobacillus positively correlated with NAFLD activity score (NAS). CONCLUSION: Gut microbiota and mycobiota undergo diverse changes at different stages of MAFLD. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

Bile acid species were analyzed in serum and fecal samples from a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy trial at baseline and after 3 and 6 weeks of orally administered colesevelam (1,875 mg twice daily, n = 26) or subcutaneously administered liraglutide (uptitrated by weekly increments of 0.6 mg from 0.6 to 1.8 mg daily, n = 26) in patients with 75 selenium-homotaurocholic acid test-verified, idiopathic, or postcholecystectomy bile acid diarrhea. Fecal microbiota composition was analyzed by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing at the same time points. RESULTS: Colesevelam increased the fecal concentrations of all bile acid species, whereas it decreased serum concentrations of secondary bile acids. Liraglutide induced a small increase in serum unconjugated bile acid concentrations without affecting fecal bile acid concentrations. No changes in fecal microbiota composition were observed with either treatment. DISCUSSION: Colesevelam and liraglutide exhibit distinct effects on serum and fecal bile acid concentrations with colesevelam reducing serum concentrations of secondary bile acids and promoting fecal bile acid excretion, whereas liraglutide enhances serum concentrations of unconjugated bile acids, potentially through deceleration of small intestinal transit time allowing more time for passive absorption of bile acids.

The gut-lung axis could be a potential therapeutic target for improving post-acute COVID-19 symptoms, and probiotics have been proposed as possible modulators. AIM: We conducted a pilot study to understand alterations in the gut-lung axis and to explore the effects of a probiotic in post-acute COVID-19 disease. METHODS: We included patients after severe COVID-19 disease (sCOV, n = 21) in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial to test the effect of a probiotic (Pro-Vi 5, Institute Allergosan, Graz, Austria) in a six-month intervention and used patients after mild disease (mCOV, n = 10) as controls, to compare the intestinal microbiome, metabolome, and patient-reported outcomes and biomarkers along the gut-lung axis at baseline and throughout probiotic intervention. RESULTS: Compared to mCOV patients, sCOV patients showed lower microbial richness, which was significantly improved by probiotic intervention. A reorganization of Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae taxa was observed in sCOV patients but remained unaffected by the intervention. Serum metabolome showed a dysregulation of lipoproteins in accordance with higher BMI and comorbidities in sCOV patients. HDL and LDL fractions/components were temporarily decreased in the probiotic group. Stool metabolome was altered at baseline in sCOV patients and an increase in L-DOPA after 3 months and butyrate after 6 months of intervention could be observed. Probiotics partially improved reduced quality of life and modulated altered immune responses in sCOV patients. Increased intestinal permeability at baseline remained unaffected. CONCLUSION: The study provides evidence of long-term alterations of the gut-lung axis after severe COVID-19 infection and suggests that probiotics can modulate the biomarkers of the gut-lung axis.

Genetic variants from a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for VK (N = 2138 Europeans) were used as instruments in our two-sample MR study to investigate whether circulating VK levels are causally associated with the risk of T1D in a large European T1D GWAS cohort (18,942 cases/520,580 controls). Through a multivariable MR (MVMR), the effects of both VK and specific gut microbiota on T1D were investigated given that the gut microbiome synthesizes VK. RESULTS: We found that changes in levels of circulating VK did not affect T1D risk in our univariate two-sample MR, but this study had limited power to detect small effects of VK (OR for T1D of less than 0.8). However, our MVMR indicated a suggestive association of VK with the risk of T1D adjusting for two different gut microbiome populations. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, VK levels are unlikely to significantly affect the risk of T1D, but small effects cannot be excluded, and the role of gut microbiome in this association should be further investigated.

The gut microbiome is increasingly recognized as a key player in metabolic health, influencing glucose and lipid metabolism through various mechanisms. However, the efficacy of gut microbiota-targeted interventions, such as probiotics, prebiotics, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT), and diet-based treatments, remains unclear for specific metabolic outcomes. In this study, the aim was to evaluate the impact of these interventions on the glucose and lipid parameters in individuals with metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus (DM), obesity, and metabolic syndrome. METHODS: This systematic review and meta-analysis included 41 randomized controlled trials that investigated the effects of gut microbiota-targeted treatments on metabolic parameters such as fasting glucose, glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c), homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance (HOMA-IR), total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), and triglycerides. A comprehensive search was conducted using databases like PubMed, Google Scholar, and Scopus, focusing on interventions targeting the gut microbiota. A meta-analysis was performed using random-effects models, with effect sizes calculated for each outcome. Risk of bias was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool. RESULTS: Gut microbiota-targeted interventions significantly reduced fasting glucose, HbA1c, HOMA-IR, total cholesterol, LDL-C, and triglycerides, with moderate heterogeneity observed across studies. The interventions also led to modest increases in HDL-C levels. Probiotic and synbiotic interventions showed the most consistent benefits in improving both glucose and lipid profiles, while FMT yielded mixed results. Short-term interventions showed rapid microbial shifts but less pronounced metabolic improvements, whereas longer-term interventions had more substantial metabolic benefits. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, it is demonstrated that gut microbiota-targeted interventions can improve key metabolic outcomes, offering a potential therapeutic strategy for managing metabolic diseases. However, the effectiveness of these interventions varies depending on the type, duration, and population characteristics, highlighting the need for further long-term studies to assess the sustained effects of microbiota modulation on metabolic health.

The potential impact of specific food additives, common in Western diets, on the risk of developing type 2 diabetes is not well understood. This study focuses on carrageenan, a widely used food additive known to induce insulin resistance and gut inflammation in animal models, and its effects on human health. METHODS: In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial conducted at a university hospital metabolic study centre, 20 males (age 27.4 ± 4.3 years, BMI 24.5 ± 2.5 kg/m2) participated. The intervention involved oral intake of carrageenan (250 mg) or placebo in the morning and in the evening and each intervention lasted 2 weeks. The primary outcome measured was insulin sensitivity (using oral glucose tolerance test [OGTT] and hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp). Additional end-points included whole body and hepatic insulin sensitivity, MRI-measured brain inflammation and insulin resistance, intestinal permeability (via lactulose-mannitol test and plasma zonulin levels), and gut microbiome composition. Immune-cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine release from peripheral blood mononuclear cells were measured. RESULTS: Overall insulin sensitivity did not show significant differences between the treatments. However, interactions between BMI and treatment were observed (OGTT-based insulin sensitivity index: p=0.04, fasting insulin resistance: p=0.01, hepatic insulin sensitivity index: p=0.04). In overweight participants, carrageenan exposure resulted in lower whole body and hepatic insulin sensitivity, a trend towards increased brain inflammation, and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) and IL-6 levels compared to placebo. Additionally, carrageenan was associated with increased intestinal permeability. In vitro natural killer (NK-)cell activation and increased pro-inflammatory cytokine release were found after carrageenan exposure in the participant's peripheral blood mononuclear cells. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that carrageenan, a common food additive, may contribute to insulin resistance and subclinical inflammation in overweight individuals through pro-inflammatory mechanisms in the gut. Further investigation into the long-term health impacts of carrageenan and other food additives is warranted. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02629705.

This age- and sex-matched case-control study involved 18 patients with unclassified diabetes, 18 patients with classic type 1 diabetes, 13 patients with type 2 diabetes, and 18 healthy individuals. Metagenomics facilitated the profiling of the gut microbiota, while untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used to quantify the serum lipids and metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings revealed a unique gut microbiota composition in unclassified diabetes patients, marked by a depletion of Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus and Clostridium and an increase in Ruminococcus torques and Lachnospiraceae bacterium 8_1_57FAA. Comparative analysis identified the combined marker panel of five bacterial species, seven serum biomarkers, and three clinical parameters could differentiate patients with UDM from HCs with an AUC of 0.94 (95% CI 0.85-1). Notably, the gut microbiota structure of patients with unclassified diabetes resembled that of type 2 diabetes patients, especially regarding disrupted lipid and branched-chain amino acid metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: Despite sharing certain metabolic features with type 2 diabetes, unclassified diabetes presents unique features. The distinct microbiota and metabolites in unclassified diabetes patients suggest a significant role in modulating glucose, lipid, and amino acid metabolism, potentially influencing disease progression. Further longitudinal studies are essential to explore therapeutic strategies targeting the gut microbiota and metabolites to modify the disease trajectory.

Individuals with type 1 diabetes are at increased risk of accelerated atherosclerosis, causing coronary artery disease (CAD). The underlying mechanisms remain unclear, but new theories proposed are damage of gut mucosa causing leakage and translocation of gut microbiota products into the circulation, leading to inflammatory responses and atherosclerosis. We therefore aimed to study the associations between gut related inflammatory biomarkers and coronary atherosclerosis in individuals with long-term type 1 diabetes. METHODS: In this cross-sectional, controlled study of 102 participants with type 1 diabetes and 63 control subjects, we measured circulating levels of intestinal fatty acid binding protein (I-FABP), soluble cluster of differentiation 14 (sCD14), lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) and interleukin 18 (IL-18) by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and further gene expression of CD14 and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) by real time PCR in circulating leukocytes and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). The participants had either established coronary heart disease (CHD) or underwent computed tomography coronary angiography (CTCA) to assess for coronary atherosclerosis, including total, calcified and soft/mixed plaque volumes. RESULTS: In the diabetes group, the levels of I-FABP were significantly higher in participants with established CHD or significant stenosis on CTCA compared to the participants with normal arteries or non-significant stenosis, with median 1.67 ng/ml (interquartile range [IQR] 1.02-2.32) vs. median 1.09 ng/ml (IQR 0.82-1.58), p = 0.003. I-FABP was associated with significant coronary artery stenosis by CTCA (> 50%) or previously established CHD in the adjusted analysis (odds ratio [OR] = 2.32, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.09-4.95; p = 0.029). The levels of I-FABP correlated also to total coronary plaque volume (r = 0.22, p < 0.05). This association remained significant after adjusting for age, sex, persistent albuminuria, eGFR, statin treatment, diabetes duration and mean time-weighted variables; HbA1c, LDL-cholesterol and systolic blood pressure (OR = 1.97, 95% CI: 1.28-3.01; p = 0.002). CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort of individuals with long-term type 1 diabetes I-FABP associated significantly with coronary artery stenosis, suggesting a potential role of gut mucosa damage in the process of atherosclerosis in type 1 diabetes.

This study aimed to characterize the oral and gut microbiota in prediabetes mellitus (Pre-DM) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients while exploring the association between tongue manifestations and the oral-gut microbiota axis in diabetes progression. METHODS: Participants included 30 Pre-DM patients, 37 individuals with T2DM, and 28 healthy controls. Tongue images and oral/fecal samples were analyzed using image processing and 16S rRNA sequencing. Machine learning techniques, including support vector machine (SVM), random forest, gradient boosting, adaptive boosting, and K-nearest neighbors, were applied to integrate tongue image data with microbiota profiles to construct predictive models for Pre-DM and T2DM classification. RESULTS: Significant shifts in tongue characteristics were identified during the progression from Pre-DM to T2DM. Elevated Firmicutes levels along the oral-gut axis were associated with white greasy fur, indicative of underlying metabolic changes. An SVM-based predictive model demonstrated an accuracy of 78.9%, with an AUC of 86.9%. Notably, tongue image parameters (TB-a, perALL) and specific microbiota (Escherichia, Porphyromonas-A) emerged as prominent diagnostic markers for Pre-DM and T2DM. CONCLUSION: The integration of tongue diagnosis with microbiome analysis reveals distinct tongue features and microbial markers. This approach significantly improves the diagnostic capability for Pre-DM and T2DM.

The infant gut microbiome undergoes rapid changes in the first year of life, supporting normal development and long-term health. While diet shapes this process, the role of fibers in complementary foods on gut microbiome maturation is poorly understood. OBJECTIVES: We explored how the transition from human milk to fibers in complementary foods shapes the taxonomic and functional maturation of the gut microbiome within the first year of life. METHODS: We assessed the longitudinal and cross-sectional development of infant gut microbiomes (N=68 infants) and metabolomes (N=33 infants) using linear mixed models to uncover their associations to dietary fibers and their food sources. Fiber intakes were assessed with 3-day food records (months 3,6,9,12) relying on CODEX-compliant fiber fraction values, and questionnaires tracked the overall complementary food introduction. Bacterial species were identified and quantified via MetaPhlAn2 from metagenomic data, and metabolomic profiles were obtained using four LC-MS methods. RESULTS: We identified 176 complementary food fiber-bacterial species associations. First plant-based fibers associated to microbiota compositions similar to breastfeeding, and further associated with aromatic amino acid metabolites, including 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (Total dietary fiber - Complementary foods (g) - β=3.50, CI 2.48-4.52, p=6.53x10-5). Distinct fibers from different food categories showed unique associations with specific bacterial taxa. Key species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitznii, associated with oat fibers (g/MJ, β=2.18, CI 1.36-2.84, p=6.12x10-6), reflective of maturing microbial communities. Fiber intake during weaning associated with shifts in metabolite profiles, including immunomodulatory metabolites, with fiber effects observed in a source- and timing-dependent manner, implicated in gradual microbiome diversification. CONCLUSIONS: Introducing complementary dietary fibers during the weaning period supports gut microbiome diversification and stabilization. Even minor dietary variations showed significant associations with microbial taxa and functions from the onset of weaning, highlighting the importance of infant dietary recommendations that support the gut microbiome maturation during early life. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01735123. Date of registration: November 24, 2012. https://www. CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT01735123.

A systematic review and meta-analysis were conducted following PRISMA guidelines to evaluate the impact of MTT on inflammatory markers in patients with T2DM. Searches were performed in PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science databases up to June 2024, with inclusion criteria limited to English-language meta-analyses of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) assessing the effects of probiotics, prebiotics, or synbiotics on inflammatory markers in T2DM patients. RESULTS: Ten meta-analyses met the inclusion criteria, comprising studies investigating the effects of various MTT interventions on CRP, IL-6, and TNF-α levels in T2DM patients. Meta-analysis results indicated significant reductions in CRP (SMD: -0.070; 95 % CI: -0.119 to -0.020) and TNF-α (SMD: -0.370; 95 % CI: -0.554 to -0.186) levels following MTT, while IL-6 reductions (SMD: -0.070; 95 % CI: -0.269 to 0.129) did not reach statistical significance. However, heterogeneity in study quality, intervention protocols, and participant demographics posed challenges in interpretation. CONCLUSIONS: While improvements in inflammatory markers with MTT have been observed, significant limitations-such as heterogeneity in study quality and variation in intervention protocols-highlight the need for further research to confirm its efficacy and clarify underlying mechanisms. Future studies should aim to address these limitations by exploring variations in dosage, supplement formulations, and bacterial strains, which are crucial for improving the reliability and broader applicability of MTT in the management of T2DM.

We included 127 patients with OSA. The multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) and Epworth sleepiness scale (ESS) were used to assess objective and subjective EDS, respectively. Disordered glucose metabolism was defined as either a physician diagnosis or having fasting blood glucose levels ≥ 5.6 mmol/L. Values of fasting insulin and homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) higher than the median values of our sample were defined as high fasting insulin and insulin resistance. Serum metabolomics and fecal microbiota were used to explore underlying mechanisms. RESULTS: Lower MSLT values were associated with higher levels of fasting blood glucose, fasting insulin, and HOMA-IR. Furthermore, objective EDS was associated with increased odds of disordered glucose metabolism, elevated fasting insulin, and insulin resistance. Dysregulation of serum valine degradation and dysbiosis of fecal Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron were associated with impaired glucose metabolism in OSA with objective EDS. No association between subjective EDS and impaired glucose metabolism was observed. CONCLUSION: OSA with objective, but not subjective, EDS is associated with an increased risk of disordered glucose metabolism and insulin resistance. Dysregulation of valine degradation and dysbiosis of Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron appear to link objective EDS and disordered glucose metabolism in OSA.

Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa (Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as antibiotic use.

Maternal health conditions, especially inflammatory, are associated with altered human milk composition. It is not known whether maternal oral inflammatory diseases, including periodontal diseases, deleteriously affect human milk composition. METHODS: A narrative review was conducted according to SANRA, the Scale for the Assessment of Narrative Review Articles, guidelines. PubMed, Google Scholar, and Cochrane database of systematic reviews were searched from September 2019 up to December 2023 using keywords such as breast/human milk, maternal health/infections, and periodontal diseases. Reference lists of relevant articles were also screened. Our primary outcome of interest was human milk composition (i.e., any changes in macronutrients, immunological components, etc.). Secondary outcomes included changes in human milk microbiome and subsequent changes in the infant gut microbiome. Outcomes were synthesized using a narrative approach where the existing evidence and current literature were summarized. No risk of bias assessment of the studies was performed in this review. FINDINGS: The search yielded no studies investigating the relationship between periodontal diseases in nursing mothers and changes in human milk composition. However, a dose-response relationship exists between the severity of periodontal diseases and the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes such as preterm birth. Mastitis and diabetes affected milk lipids. Immunoglobulin A (sIgA) was increased in mastitis, whereas reduced concentrations were reported in diabetes. Potential biological pathways through which periodontal diseases can negatively affect human milk composition include the systemic dissemination of inflammatory cytokines like IL-6, PGE2, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-β that can be up-regulated by bacterial by-products. This biological plausibility needs to be investigated, given the potentially negative impact on the quality of human milk that could be caused by periodontal inflammation.

Studies exploring the mechanisms underlying T2DM and PD, as well as the treatment of these conditions with medicinal herbs, were extracted from several electronic databases, including PubMed, Web of Science, Google Scholar, and China National Knowledge Infrastructure (CNKI). RESULTS: Numerous studies have shown that inflammation, oxidative stress, insulin resistance, impaired autophagy, gut microbiota dysbiosis, and ferroptosis are shared mechanisms underlying T2DM and PD mediated through the NLRP3 inflammasome, NF-κB, MAPK, Keap1/Nrf2/ARE, PI3K/AKT, AMPK/SIRT1, and System XC--GSH-GPX4 signaling pathways. Thirty-four medicinal herbs, including 2 herbal formulas, 4 single herbs, and 28 active compounds, have been reported to potentially exert anti-T2DM and anti-PD effects by targeting these shared mechanisms. CONCLUSIONS: Traditional Chinese medicine effectively combats T2DM and PD through shared pathological mechanisms, highlighting their potential for application in treating these comorbid conditions.

Clinical observations have recently shown that Abelmoschus manihot (L.) in the form of Huangkui capsule (HKC) and in combination with irbesartan (EB) is an effective therapy for diabetic nephropathy (DN) in patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D). The present study aims to explore the mechanisms underlying the therapeutic efficacies of HKC and its combination with EB in DN via the gut-kidney axis. METHODS: HKC, EB, and their combination or vehicle were administered in db/db mice, which is an animal model for the study of T2D and DN. Comparative analyses of the gut microbiota, serum metabolites, and kidney transcriptomics before and after drug administration were performed. RESULTS: After treatment with HKC, EB, and their combination for 4 weeks, the urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratios decreased significantly in the db/db mice with DN. In terms of the gut microbiota, the abundances of Faecalitalea, Blautia, and Streptococcus increased but those of Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Enterobacteriaceae, and Desulfovibrio decreased. Parallelly, serum metabolites, mainly including quercetin 3'-glucuronide and L-dopa, were elevated while cortisol and cytochalasin B were reduced. Furthermore, the S100a8, S100a9, Trem1, and Mmp7 genes in the kidneys were downregulated. These altered elements were associated with proteinuria/albuminuria reduction. However, EB had no effects on the changes in blood pressure and specific differentially expressed genes in the kidneys. CONCLUSION: The present study provides experimental evidence that HKC regulates the gut microbiota, circulating metabolites, and renal gene activities, which are useful for better understanding of the action mechanisms of A. manihot in the treatment of DN through the gut-kidney axis.

Primary Sjogren's syndrome (pSS) is a common chronic autoimmune disease that presents limited treatment options and poses significant challenges for patients. Maidong Dishao Decoction (MDDST), a traditional Chinese medicine compound, has demonstrated potential in alleviating dryness symptoms associated with pSS. Therefore, it is important to study the specific mechanism of its therapeutic effect. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to investigate the effects of MDDST on gut microbiota, short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), and the Th17/Treg immune balance in non-obese diabetes (NOD) mice. METHODS: The study employed ultrahigh-performance liquid chromatography coupled with quadrupole-exactive mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QE-MS) to identify the primary components of MDDST. Subsequently, hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA), and flow cytometry analyses were conducted to evaluate the therapeutic effects of MDDST in NOD mice. Additionally, 16S rDNA sequencing and gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) were utilized to assess the influence of MDDST on gut microbiota and SCFAs. Finally, fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) and SCFA-based interventions were performed to elucidate the mechanisms through which MDDST exerts its effects. RESULTS: The research findings demonstrate that MDDST exerts therapeutic effects on NOD mice, primarily manifested as reduced inflammation, decreased water intake, ameliorated pathological changes and lowered levels of Sjogren's syndrome antigen A (SSA) and immunoglobulin G (IgG). Additionally, MDDST significantly decreased serum levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and interleukin-17 (IL-17), while enhancing levels of interleukin-10 (IL-10) and transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), thereby regulating the Th17/Treg immune balance. Further investigations revealed that MDDST treatment induces alterations in gut microbiota composition and elevates SCFA levels in the gut. Subsequent FMT and SCFA intervention experiments demonstrated a downregulation of pSS-related phenotypes. CONCLUSION: In summary, MDDST demonstrates protective effects against pSS by restoring the balance between Th17 and Treg cells. The therapeutic effects can be partially attributed to its regulation of gut microbiota and SCFAs. Our finding provides a new option for treating pSS.

The aqueous extraction of sesame oil is a traditional process that generates a large amount of melanoidins. However, little is known about the characteristics and bioactive functions of these melanoidins. RESULTS: Electronic tongue, fluorescence emission spectroscopy, and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy analyses indicated that melanoidins from sesame residues (MELs) are brown macromolecular compounds with protein skeletons and heteroaromatic ring structures, a bitter taste, and instability in strong oxidative and reductive environments. The MELs demonstrated inhibitory effects on α-glucosidase, α-amylase and pancreatic lipase in vitro. These MELs mitigated weight loss in mice with type 2 diabetes (T2DM), reduced their fasting blood glucose to 54.73% (500 mg kg-1 day-1) of the initial value, increased the glycogen levels in the liver and skeletal muscles, lowered blood lipid levels, and protected the liver. Western blot analysis revealed that MELs inhibited the activities of enzymes such as PEPCK, FBPase, and G6Pase through the IRS-1/PI3K/Akt and AMPK pathways, increased the activity of the enzymes hexokinase (HK) and pyruvate kinase (PK), enhanced liver glycolytic ability, and promoted liver glycogen synthesis, thereby reducing blood glucose levels in T2DM mice. Moreover, MELs reduced the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroides (F/B) in the intestines of T2DM mice, increased the relative abundance of beneficial bacteria such as Lactobacillus, Coprococcus, and Ruminococcus, and reduced the propionic acid content. CONCLUSIONS: Melanoidins can regulate T2DM by activating the IRS-1/PI3K/Akt and AMPK-signaling pathways and ameliorating gut microbiota imbalances in T2DM mice. © 2024 Society of Chemical Industry.

A model of DD was established and treated with medium and high doses of ZJJ as well as Metformin & Fluoxetine. A detection of depressive-like behavior was then conducted on the rats. Proinflammatory cytokines were measured in cerebrospinal fluid, and HPA axis-related proteins, glucose metabolism, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were measured in serum. Fecal samples from each group were collected and analyzed by 16S rRNA sequencing; TLR4 and MyD88 levels were detected by Western blot and immunohistochemistry (IHC) in the hippocampus. RESULTS: High doses of ZJJ (ZJJ-H) were found to alleviate HPA axis hyperactivity and improve gut microbiota in rats with DD. Additionally, ZJJ treatment attenuated the inflammatory response in cerebrospinal fluid, e.g. a significant reduction in proinflammatory factors, a decrease in serum LPS levels, and an inhibition of TLR4/MyD88-related pathways in the hippocampus. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: ZJJ improved DD glucose metabolism and alleviated depression-like behaviors by improving gut microbiota and inhibiting hippocampal TLR4/Myd88 signaling pathways.

In a three-month, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study, 110 T2DM patients received either fish oil (n = 55) or corn oil (n = 55) capsules daily. Serum lipids, glycemic parameters, gut microbiota diversity, and lipidomics were assessed. RESULTS: This study found that fish oil-derived omega-3 PUFAs intervention did not significantly lower the fasting plasma glucose levels when compared with the baseline level (p > 0.05). However, serum fasting blood glucose (p = 0.039), glycosylated hemoglobin levels (p = 0.048), HOMA-IR (p = 0.022), total cholesterol (p < 0.001), triglyceride (p = 0.034), LDL cholesterol (p = 0.048), and non-HDL levels (p = 0.046) were significantly lower in the fish oil group compared with the corn oil group after three months of intervention. Also, it altered glycerophospholipid metabolism and gut microbiota. After three months, the fish oil group showed a significantly lower abundance of Desulfobacterota compared with the corn oil control group (p = 0.003), with reduced levels of Colidextribacter (p = 0.002), Ralstonia (p = 0.021), and Klebsiella (p = 0.013). Conversely, the abundance of Limosilactobacillus (p = 0.017), Lactobacillus (p = 0.011), and Haemophilus (p = 0.018) increased significantly. In addition, relevant glycolipid metabolism indicators showed significant correlations with the altered profiles of serum lipid metabolites, intestinal bacteria, and fungi. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the impact of fish oil-derived omega-3 PUFAs on intestinal microbiota structure and function in patients with type 2 diabetes. The observed decrease in pathogenic bacterial species and the enhancement of beneficial species may have significant implications for gut health and systemic inflammation, both of which are pivotal in managing diabetes. Further research is warranted to comprehensively elucidate the long-term benefits and underlying mechanisms of these microbiota alterations.

Mice with RORγt total (KI/KI) or partial (KI/w) knockout were fed a high-fat high-sugar diet (HFHSD) for eight weeks as a model of WD. Half of the mice received miso supplementation in addition to the HFHSD. Weight gain, glucose tolerance and insulin resistance, intestinal barrier integrity, intestinal immunity, and liver condition were assessed. RESULTS: Miso supplementation increased SCFA levels in the small intestine, which stimulated ILC3 function in KI/w mice. Glucose tolerance was improved, intestinal barrier integrity was ameliorated, and mucus production was increased. The level of IL-22 was increased, while pro-inflammatory ILC1s, M1 macrophages, TNF-α, and IL-1β were decreased. Liver condition was not affected. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that miso supplementation influenced several factors involved in inflammation and intestinal barrier integrity by stimulating ILC3s in RORγt heterozygous mice. Moreover, it showed that the number of ILC3s is not the key factor in immune regulation, but rather the ability of ILC3 to produce IL-22 and employ it to control the immune response in the small intestine.

C57BL6/J mice were fed a normal diet (ND) without polystyrene MPs (PS-MPs) or with PS-MPs (1000 µg/L or 5000 µg/L) for six weeks. Subsequently, intestinal permeability, gut microbiota, and metabolite levels in the serum, feces, and liver were determined. RESULTS: Mice fed the ND showed no increase in intestinal permeability in either group. However, high MPs concentrations led to increased serum lipid levels and exacerbated fatty liver function. Oral exposure to MPs did not affect the number of innate lymphoid cells or short-chain fatty acids in the intestine. However, it increased the number of natural killer cells, altered the gut microbiota, induced inflammation, and modulated the expression of genes related to nutrient transport in the intestine. The severity of intestinal disturbance tended to worsen with dose. DISCUSSION: Despite the absence of LGS, high concentrations of MPs induced dyslipidemia and NAFLD. Oral exposure to MPs triggered intestinal inflammation via natural killer cells, altered the gut microbiota, and modulated nutrient metabolism. Our study highlights the need for environmental measures to reduce oral MPs exposure in the future.

We used rat model to investigated the mechanisms of the offspring's neural damage that Nd2O3 exposure in pregnancy. To verify the neural damage of offspring rats, we examed BBB-related factors, such like glutamate and ROS levels in brain tissue, behavioral tests, hippocampal and cortical damage, as well as changes in gut microbiota, intestinal mucosal barrier, and SCFAs in the intestine. Also, we observed some specific indicators of intestinal immune barrier function and gut nerve-related indicators. RESULTS: Maternal Nd2O3 exposure reduced the content of offspring tight junction proteins, increased BBB permeability, leading to Nd accumulation and brain tissue inflammation, affecting offspring's neural development and weakening their spatial learning ability. Nd2O3 also disrupted BBB integrity by regulating SCFAs and BGA. Probiotic intervention in the offspring rats exposed to 2% Nd2O3 showed significant recovery of inflammation in both brain and colon tissues, and reduced BBB permeability. CONCLUSION: Maternal exposure to Nd2O3 affects the offspring's BGA, targeting brain and colon tissues, increasing BBB permeability, affecting neural development, causing damage to the intestinal mucosa, and impacting children's gut development. Probiotics can alleviate these effects. These findings provide valuable insights into understanding the neurodevelopmental and intestinal developmental toxicity of Nd2O3 and its prevention and treatment. It also calls for a comprehensive assessment of the health risks of susceptible populations to Nd2O3, such as pregnant women. It may providing theoretical basis for preventing and controlling neodymium-induced harm in children by examing the repair mechanism of the damage through probiotic intervention.

Tissue regenerative capacity following evisceration, potentially influenced by environmental contaminants and intestinal microflora, is essential for the financial success of Apostichopus japonicus farming. However, the morphological structure, gut microbiome composition, and genes expression pattern of the regenerated gut after exposure to high levels of TBBPA remain poorly unclear. METHODS: In this research, the effect of TBBPA exposure on tissue regeneration in A. japonicus was investigated through a comprehensive multi-omics approach. RESULTS: Our results showed that the integrity, the intestinal wall thickness, and the villi length of the regenerated intestines in A. japonicus decreased after treatment with high levels of TBBPA. The findings from PCoA and NMDS analyses revealed that the microbial community composition was significantly altered following exposure to high concentrations of TBBPA in the regenerated intestines of A. japonicus. The KEGG pathway enrichment analysis indicated that the DEGs (differentially expressed genes) were predominantly enriched on metabolism and immunity-related signaling pathways after exposure to high levels of TBBPA. These included pathways involved in the PPAR signaling pathway, ECM receptor interaction, glycerolipid metabolism, and fatty acid degradation. Interestingly, the results have demonstrated that there are 77 transcript factors that were significantly different after exposure to TBBPA. CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that high levels of exposure to TBBPA induces an imbalance of the metabolic homeostasis by regulating the expression levels of transcription factors in the regenerated intestines of A. japonicus.

Bacteriophages are known modulators of community composition and activity in environmental and host-associated microbiomes. However, the impact single phages have on bacterial community dynamics under viral predation, the extent and duration of their effect, are not completely understood. In this study, we combine morphological and genomic characterization of a novel marine phage, isolated from the Baltic sponge Halichondria panicea, and report on first attempts of controlled phage-manipulation of natural sponge-associated microbiomes. RESULTS: We used culture-based and culture-independent (16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing) methods to investigate bacterial community composition and dynamics in sponge microbiomes with and without the addition of phages. Upon application of a novel Maribacter specialist phage Panino under controlled conditions, we were able to detect community-wide shifts in the microbiome composition and load after 72 h. While bacterial community composition became more dissimilar over time in the presence of phages, species evenness and richness were maintained. Upon phage exposure, we observed the loss of several low-abundance constituent taxa of the resident microbiota, while other originally underrepresented taxa increased. Virulent phages likely induce community-wide disturbances, evident in changes in the total sponge microbial profile by specific elimination of constituent taxa, which leads to an increase in bacterial abundance of opportunistic taxa, such as the genera Vibrio, Pseudoalteromonas, and Photobacterium. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that sponge microbiome diversity and, by extension, its resilience depend on the maintenance of resident bacterial community members, irrespective of their abundance. Phage-induced disturbances can significantly alter community structure by promoting the growth of opportunistic bacteria like Vibrio and shifting the microbiome to a dysbiotic state. These insights highlight the role of bacteriophages in shaping microbiome dynamics and underscore the potential for phage application in managing bacterial community composition in marine host-associated environments.

The potential impact of specific food additives, common in Western diets, on the risk of developing type 2 diabetes is not well understood. This study focuses on carrageenan, a widely used food additive known to induce insulin resistance and gut inflammation in animal models, and its effects on human health. METHODS: In a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial conducted at a university hospital metabolic study centre, 20 males (age 27.4 ± 4.3 years, BMI 24.5 ± 2.5 kg/m2) participated. The intervention involved oral intake of carrageenan (250 mg) or placebo in the morning and in the evening and each intervention lasted 2 weeks. The primary outcome measured was insulin sensitivity (using oral glucose tolerance test [OGTT] and hyperinsulinaemic-euglycaemic clamp). Additional end-points included whole body and hepatic insulin sensitivity, MRI-measured brain inflammation and insulin resistance, intestinal permeability (via lactulose-mannitol test and plasma zonulin levels), and gut microbiome composition. Immune-cell activation and pro-inflammatory cytokine release from peripheral blood mononuclear cells were measured. RESULTS: Overall insulin sensitivity did not show significant differences between the treatments. However, interactions between BMI and treatment were observed (OGTT-based insulin sensitivity index: p=0.04, fasting insulin resistance: p=0.01, hepatic insulin sensitivity index: p=0.04). In overweight participants, carrageenan exposure resulted in lower whole body and hepatic insulin sensitivity, a trend towards increased brain inflammation, and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) and IL-6 levels compared to placebo. Additionally, carrageenan was associated with increased intestinal permeability. In vitro natural killer (NK-)cell activation and increased pro-inflammatory cytokine release were found after carrageenan exposure in the participant's peripheral blood mononuclear cells. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that carrageenan, a common food additive, may contribute to insulin resistance and subclinical inflammation in overweight individuals through pro-inflammatory mechanisms in the gut. Further investigation into the long-term health impacts of carrageenan and other food additives is warranted. TRIAL REGISTRATION: NCT02629705.

The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome. METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA gene markers. RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the Eukaryotic community. CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

According to the gene-environment interactions (GEi) concept, the mechanism of health impairment can be explained by genetic factors, environmental factors, or their interaction. Physical and mental health effects resulting from environmental exposure may be classified either as toxicity, immune response, and allergic reaction. Moreover, despite the already established therapeutic approaches to bronchial asthma and decreasing mortality due to bronchial asthma, patients with difficult and severe asthma are increasing in number. This review outlines recent topics in the field of allergies, focusing on asthma. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Living environment-derived pollutants and their involvement in the pathogenesis of asthma and its exacerbation, referred to here as an exposome concept, comprises the three domains of internal, specific external, and general external. Living environment-derived pollutants include exposure to pollutants in workplaces, climate change, air pollution, microplastics, tobacco smoke, biodiversity change and loss, changing dietary habits, and the microbiome. These are associated with the modernization, urbanization, and globalization of human society. Although many novel compounds are currently available, their harmful health effects, such as allergy, are not thoroughly understood. Hence, the means to mitigate these are unknown. Dietary changes from a traditional diet rich in fish to a Western-style diet are considered critical environmental factors and therefore, associated with an increased prevalence of allergies. Cytokines, including TSLP, IL-25, and IL-33, released from the airway epithelium in response to various triggers (exposure to diverse environmental factors) are known as alarmins. Anti-alarmin antibodies are a promising therapeutic approach against severe and difficult allergic disorders. Collaboration between hospitals and clinics and occupational and clinical medicine is imperative for treating and managing severe asthma. In addition to avoiding environmental exposure, understanding the pathogenesis and exacerbation of asthma is essential for future research in the field of allergy and immunotoxicology.

This study aims to confirm the associations of air pollution with ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD); to explore interactions with genetics and lifestyle; and to characterize potential epigenetic mechanisms. METHODS: We identified over 450,000 individuals from the UK Biobank and investigated the relationship between air pollution and incident inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Cox regression was utilized to calculate hazard ratios (HRs), while also exploring potential interactions with genetics and lifestyle factors. Additionally, we conducted epigenetic Mendelian randomization (MR) analyses to examine the association between air pollution-related DNA methylation and UC. Finally, our findings were validated through genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of UC, as well as co-localization and gene expression analyses. FINDINGS: Higher exposures to NOx (HR = 1.20, 95% CI 1.05-1.38), NO2 (HR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.03-1.36), PM2.5 (HR = 1.19, 95% CI = 1.05-1.36) and combined air pollution score (HR = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.11-1.45) were associated with incident UC but not CD. Interactions with genetic risk score and lifestyle were observed. In MR analysis, we found five and 22 methylated CpG sites related to PM2.5 and NO2 exposure to be significantly associated with UC. DNA methylation alterations at CXCR2 and sites within the MHC class III region, were validated in genome-wide DNA methylation analysis, co-localization analysis and analysis of colonic tissue. INTERPRETATION: We report a potential causal association between air pollution and UC, modified by lifestyle and genetic influences. Biological pathways implicated include epigenetic alterations in key genetic loci, including CXCR2 and susceptible loci within MHC class III region. FUNDING: Xue Li was supported by the Natural Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of Zhejiang Province (LR22H260001) and the National Nature Science Foundation of China (No. 82204019). ET was supported by the CRUK Career Development Fellowship (C31250/A22804) and the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO). JW was supported by Belgium by a PhD Fellowship strategic basic research (SB) grant (1S06023N). JKN was supported by the National Science Center, Poland (No. 2020/39/D/NZ5/02720). The IBD Character was supported by the European Union's Seventh Framework Programme [FP7] grant IBD Character (No. 2858546).

Radiation enteritis (RE) is a common complication of radiotherapy for abdominal and pelvic tumors, adversely affecting treatment outcomes and patients' quality of life. Gut microbiome alterations may contribute to RE development, but the underlying pathogenic factors are not fully understood. This study aimed to characterize the intestinal microbial changes associated with RE and severe acute radiation enteritis (SARE) and to identify predictive biomarkers. METHODS: We enrolled 50 cervical cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy and 15 healthy women (controls). Stool samples were collected at the baseline and during weeks 2, 4, and 6 of radiotherapy, and then analyzed using 16 S rDNA sequencing and bioinformatics. RESULTS: Although the Bacteroidetes/Firmicutes (B/F) ratio was higher in patients with RE or SARE, it alone could not predict these conditions. Three enterotypes were identified based on dominant genera: Blautia (enterotype 1), Escherichia-Shigella (enterotype 2), and Faecalibacterium (enterotype 3). A decrease in Blautia and an increase in Escherichia-Shigella and Faecalibacterium were correlated with RE and SARE. Univariate logistic regression revealed that the Faecalibacterium enterotype at the baseline was associated with a 4.4-fold higher risk of developing SARE (odds ratio 5.400; P = 0.017). The Escherichia-Shigella enterotype was also linked to increased SARE incidence. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that while single bacterial genera or the B/F ratio are insufficient predictors, enterotype classification may serve as a potential biomarker for predicting SARE in patients undergoing radiotherapy.

Particulate matter (PM) and air pollution have been suggested to be associated with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), contributing significantly to global respiratory disease-related mortality. This study aimed to investigate whether seasonal exposure to PM influences dysbiosis in the respiratory microbiota of patients with COPD. METHODS: Sputum samples were collected four times over 1 year from 102 patients with COPD, and 16S rRNA sequencing was performed. The dynamics of the airway microbiota were analyzed depending on PM exposure levels and season. RESULTS: The PM-low exposure group had higher α-diversity compared to the PM-high exposure group, particularly noted in spring. Some bacterial groups, including seven species such as Treponema socranskii, were more abundant in the low exposure group. Additionally, the bacterial community structure in summer significantly differed from that in other seasons, with significantly increased α-diversity in this season. The difference in the airway microbiome due to PM exposure was prominent in patients with moderate COPD. CONCLUSIONS: PM exposure may influence changes in the sputum microbiome depending on exposure levels and seasonal variations. Our results suggest that airway microbiomes could vary with PM exposure according to seasonal trends.

Our results show that stringent adherence to the Super Clean protocol produces a significantly decreased abundance of aerobic spore-forming Bacillota after 21 days. This microbiomic shift was correlated with significantly increased levels of obesity and impaired glucose metabolism. There was no evidence of colitis, liver disease or hypercholesterolaemia. CONCLUSIONS: This new murine model successfully isolates EAS-Fs and has potential utility for future research, allowing for an investigation into the clinical impact of living in relative hygienic conditions.

Non/low-caloric artificial sweeteners (NAS) are recognized as chemical additives substituting sugars to avoid caloric intake and subsequent sugar-derived diseases such as diabetes and hyperglycemia. Six NAS have been claimed safe and are authorized by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for public use, with acceptable daily intake information available: aspartame, acesulfame-K, saccharin, sucralose, neotame, and advantame. However, the impacts of NAS on the gut microbiome have raised potential concerns, since sporadic research revealed NAS-induced microbial changes in the gastrointestinal tracts and alterations in the microbiome-host interactive metabolism. METHODS: Given the fact that the gut microbiome influences kaleidoscopic physiological functions in host health, this review aimed to decipher the impacts of NAS on the gut microbiome by implementing a comprehensive two-stage literature analysis based on each NAS. RESULTS: This review documented disturbed microbiomes due to NAS exposure to a maximal resolution of species level using taxonomic clustering analysis, and recorded metabolism alterations involved in gut microbiome-host interactions. CONCLUSIONS: The results elucidated that specific NAS exhibited discrepant impacts on the gut microbiome, even though overlapping on the genera and species were identified. Some NAS caused glucose tolerance impairment in the host, but the key metabolites and their underlying mechanisms were different. Furthermore, this review embodied the challenges and future directions of current NAS-gut microbiome research to inspire advanced examination of the NAS exposure-gut microbiome-host metabolism axis.

Biofilm formation in Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) helps bacteria survive antibiotic exposure and supports bacterial colonization and persistence in the stomach. Most of the published articles have focused on one aspect of the biofilm. Therefore, we conducted the current study to better understand the mechanism of biofilm formation, how the biofilm contributes to antibiotic resistance, and how the biofilm modifies the medication delivery mechanism. METHODS: We conducted a literature review analysis of the published articles on the Helicobacter pylori biofilm between 1998 and 2024 from the PubMed database to retrieve eligible articles. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria, two hundred and seventy-three articles were eligible for our study. RESULTS: The results showed that biofilm formation starts as adhesion and progresses through micro-colonies, maturation, and dispersion in a planktonic form. Moreover, specific genes modulate each phase of biofilm formation. Few studies have shown that mechanisms, such as quorum sensing and diffusible signal factors, enhance coordination among bacteria when switching from biofilm to planktonic states. Different protein expressions were also observed between planktonic and biofilm strains, and the biofilm architecture was supported by exopolysaccharides, extracellular DNA, and outer membrane vesicles. CONCLUSIONS: This infrastructure is responsible for the increased survival of bacteria, especially in harsh environments or in the presence of antibiotics. Therefore, understanding the biofilm formation for H. pylori is crucial. This study illustrates biofilm formation in H. pylori to help improve the treatment of H. pylori infection.

Pre- and post-shift nasal rinses were administered and collected alongside full shift inhalable personal breathing zone (PBZ) samples for each participant for up to 5 consecutive days. Treatment group participants (n = 23) received hypertonic saline rinses while control group participants (n = 22) received normotonic saline rinses. Particulate matter (PM) and endotoxin concentrations were quantified from PBZ samples using gravimetric and enzymatic analytical methods, respectively. Pre- and post-shift rinses were analyzed for pro- and anti-inflammatory markers and microbial diversity using a multiplex assay and 16S rRNA sequencing, respectively. RESULTS: PM and endotoxin concentrations were comparable between groups indicating similar exposures. Post-shift pro-inflammatory markers were significantly higher than pre-shift for IL-13 (p = .047), IL-1β (p < .001), IL-6 (p < .001), IL-8 (p < .001), and TNF-α (p = .024). There was no evidence of a difference in log concentrations between intervention group or day among any of the measured inflammatory markers. Anti-inflammatory IL-10 concentrations increased across the 5 sample days, independent of treatment group suggesting tonicity may not be driving the change. However, this result was not significant (p = .217). Nasal microbiome alpha (within sample) and beta (between sample) diversity metrics did not differ significantly between group or day demonstrating no adverse washout intervention effects. CONCLUSION: This study provided encouraging results that warrant future research to further evaluate saline nasal rinses as a workplace intervention.

Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), a novel water treatment agent, can be used for disinfection, water quality adjustment, and disease prevention, while excessive H2O2 can injure farm animals, even leading to death. Hydrogen peroxide is a recommended disinfectant and bactericide for treating gill diseases and vibriosis in the greenfin horse-faced filefish Thamnaconus septentrionalis. However, its cumulative effect, toxic molecular mechanism and relevant signal transduction/metabolic networks in marine fishes are largely unknown. RESULTS: We employed a multi-omics approach to investigate the detrimental effects of 50 mg/L H2O2 exposure (2 h/d) on filefish for 2 d, 4 d, and 6 d. Transcriptome sequencing showed that differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were mainly classified into functions such as signal transduction, nervous system, liver and bile acid metabolism, energy metabolism, cell adhesion and communication, inflammation and immune response. Metabolomic analysis found that the significantly changed metabolites (SCMs) were involved in phenylalanine metabolism, inflammatory mediator regulation, linoleic acid metabolism, and necroptosis. The main SCMs were cholic acid, carnitine C12:1, dimethylmalonic acid, glutamic acid, L-lactic acid, shikimic acid, 2-methylsuccinic acid, and others. Moreover, H2O2-induced oxidative stress also disturbs the balance of the gut microbiota, altering the microbial composition and affecting digestive processes. CONCLUSIONS: Integrated multiomics analysis revealed that H2O2-induced detrimental impacts include mucosal damage, inflammatory and immune responses, altered energy metabolism, and gut microbiota disorders. These findings offer novel insights into the harmful effects and signal transduction/metabolic pathways triggered by H2O2 exposure in marine fishes.

maternal health during pregnancy can affect the intestinal microbial community of offspring, but currently the impact of intrauterine environmental changes resulting from gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) on the microbiota of offspring as well as its interaction with the immune system remains unclear. AIMS: to explore the impact of intrauterine microbial exposure during pregnancy of gestational diabetes mellitus on the development of neonate's intestinal microbiota and activation of immune responses. METHODS: Levels of lipopolysaccharides in cord blood from GDM and expression of microbial recognition-related proteins in the placenta were measured. To evaluate embryonic intestinal colonization, pregnant mice with GDM were administered with labeled Escherichia coli or Lactobacillus. The intestinal colonization of pups was analyzed through 16S rRNA gene sequencing and labeled microbial culture. Additionally, memory T lymphocyte and dendritic cell co-culture experiments were conducted to elucidate the immune memory of intestinal microbes during the embryonic stages. RESULT: Gestational diabetes mellitus led to elevated umbilical cord blood LPS level and increased GFP labeled Escherichia coli in the offspring's intestine after gestational microbial exposure. The mouse model of GDM exhibited increased immune markers including TLR4, TLR5, IL-22 and IL-23 in the placenta and a recall response from memory T cells in offspring's intestines, with similar observations found in human experiments. Furthermore, reduced intestinal microbiome diversity and an increased ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes was found in GDM progeny, with the stability of bacterial colonization been interfered. CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation has revealed a noteworthy correlation between gestational diabetes and intrauterine microbial exposure, as well as alterations in the neonatal microbiota and activation of immune responses. These findings highlight the gestational diabetes's role on offspring's gut microbiota and immune system interactions with early-life pathogen exposure.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) affects over 10 % of the global population and can lead to kidney failure and death. Exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) is associated with increased risk of CKD, yet studies examining the mechanisms linking PFAS and kidney function are lacking. In this exploratory study, we examined longitudinal associations of PFAS exposure with kidney function, and tested if associations were mediated by altered gut bacterial taxa or plasma metabolites using a multi-omics mediation analysis. METHODS: Seventy-eight young adults from the Children's Health Study were included in this longitudinal cohort study. At baseline, seven plasma PFAS and untargeted plasma metabolomics were measured using liquid chromatography/mass-spectrometry. Baseline gut bacterial abundance was characterized using 16S rRNA sequencing and examined at the genus level. At follow-up, serum creatinine and cystatin-C concentrations were quantified to estimate glomerular filtration rate (eGFR). High-dimensional multi-omics analyses were conducted to assess the association between baseline PFAS exposure with follow-up eGFR, mediated by gut microbiome and circulating metabolite levels. RESULTS: PFAS burden score, a variable developed to estimate exposure to chemical mixtures, was associated with kidney function. Each standard deviation increase in baseline PFAS burden score was associated with a 2.4 % lower eGFR at follow-up (95 % CI:[0.1 %,4.8 %]). Following high-dimensional mediation analyses with the microbiome and circulating metabolites, a joint component (characterized by reduced Lachnospiraceae and 17b-estradiol and increased succinate, retinoate and dodecanoic acid) and a metabolite component (characterized by increased hypotaurine and decreased D-pinitol and ureidopropionate) mediated 38 % and 50 % of the effect between PFAS burden score and eGFR, respectively. CONCLUSION: Our proof-of-concept analysis provides the first evidence that reduced short-chain fatty acid-producing bacteria and anti-inflammatory metabolites may link PFAS exposure with impaired kidney function. This study raises the possibility of future targeted interventions that can alter gut microbiome or circulating metabolite profiles to prevent PFAS induced kidney damage.

There is a growing interest in understanding the association between the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration in an experimental colitis model. METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted. RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal linings. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

Microbiome was profiled (16S rRNA sequencing) in feces from 196 children with CD. Sixty participants also provided samples after 18 months. Mural inflammation (Pediatric Inflammatory Crohn's Magnetic Resonance Enterography Index, PICMI), the simple endoscopic score for CD, and the weighted pediatric Crohn's disease activity index (wPCDAI) were assessed. Fecal calprotectin, plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), and fecal water content (FWC), a proxy of gastrointestinal transit time, were measured too. RESULTS: Microbiome α diversity, clustering, and differential taxa were related to disease status, but varied remarkably by disease activity measure used. The strongest relationships between microbiome and disease activity status were observed using wPCDAI; fewer or no relationships were seen using more objective measures like PICMI. Taxa predictive of disease activity status were dependent on the disease activity measure used with negligible overlap. Active disease was associated with more pathobionts (eg, Viellonella, Enterobacterales) and fewer fiber-fermenting organisms. The effect FWC had on microbiome superseded the effect of active disease for all disease activity measures, particularly with wPCDAI. Accounting for FWC, the differences in microbial signatures explained by disease activity status were attenuated or lost. CONCLUSIONS: In CD, microbiome signatures fluctuate depending on the measure used to assess disease severity; several of these signals might be secondary disease effects linked with changes in gut motility in active disease. PICMI appears to be less influenced when studying relationships between microbiome and mural inflammation in CD.

The human gut microbiome produces and consumes a variety of compounds that interact with the host and impact health. Succinate is of particular interest as it intersects with both host and microbiome metabolism. However, which gut bacteria are most responsible for the consumption of intestinal succinate is poorly understood. RESULTS: We build upon an enrichment-based whole fecal sample culturing approach and identify two main bacterial taxa that are responsible for succinate consumption in the human intestinal microbiome, Phascolarctobacterium and Dialister. These two taxa have the hallmark of a functional guild and are strongly mutual exclusive across 21,459 fecal samples in 94 cohorts and can thus be used to assign a robust "succinotype" to an individual. We show that they differ with respect to their rate of succinate consumption in vitro and that this is associated with higher concentrations of fecal succinate. Finally, individuals suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more likely to have the Dialister succinotype compared to healthy subjects. CONCLUSIONS: We identified that only two bacterial genera are the key succinate consumers in human gut microbiome, despite the fact that many more intestinal bacteria encode for the succinate pathway. This highlights the importance of phenotypic assays in functionally profiling intestinal microbiota. A stratification based on "succinotype" is to our knowledge the first function-based classification of human intestinal microbiota. The association of succinotype with IBD thus builds a bridge between microbiome function and IBD pathophysiology related to succinate homeostasis. Video Abstract.

Utilizing metagenomic data from the Study of a Prospective Adult Research Cohort with Inflammatory Bowel Disease, available via the IBD Plexus Program of the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation, we used a tree-based dichotomous approach to assemble distinct clusters of species-level bacterial co-abundance groups (CAGs). We evaluated the abundance of bacterial CAGs and fungal taxa during remission (n=166) and activity (n=46). We examined if the bacterial CAGs identified in our cohorts were conserved in 2 healthy cohorts and in a Korean UC cohort. RESULTS: CAG3 and CAG8, dominated by bacteria from family Lachnospiraceae, were associated with remission. Low CAG8 and elevated Candida genus were predictive of active UC. Constituents from CAG8 were influential hub species of the remission-associated microbial UC network, including Ruminococcus gnavus, Erysipelatoclostridium ramosum, Blautia and Dorea species. These hub species interactions were preserved in 2 healthy cohorts and were partially recapitulated in a Korean UC cohort. CAG8 abundance correlated with the secondary bile acid production pathway. Bacterial CAGs did not correlate with Candida, however Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Alistipes putredinis were negatively associated with Candida. CONCLUSIONS: Lachnospiriceae-dominated bacterial CAGs were associated with remission in UC, with key bacterial interactions within the CAG also observed in 2 healthy cohorts and a Korean UC cohort. Bacterial CAG-based analyses may help to inform the design of candidate consortia for microbiome-based therapeutics.

Recently, there has been an increase in the number of studies focusing on the association between the gut microbiome and obesity or inflammatory diseases, especially in adults. However, there is a lack of studies investigating the association between gut microbiome and gastrointestinal (GI) diseases in adolescents. METHOD: We obtained 16S rRNA-seq datasets for gut microbiome analysis from 202 adolescents, comprising ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease (CD), obesity (Ob), and healthy controls (HC). We utilized Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) and Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) to acquire Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs). Subsequently, we analyzed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Orthology (KO) terms and pathway enrichment for the identified OTUs. RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the difference between the gut microbiomes in adolescents with GI diseases and those in healthy adolescents using 202 samples of 16S rRNA sequencing data. The distribution of the six main gut microbiota (i.e., unclassified Dorea, unclassified Lachnospiraceae, unclassified Ruminococcus, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella copri, unclassified Sutterella) was different based on the status of obesity and inflammatory diseases. Dysbiosis was observed within Lachnospiraceae in adolescents with inflammatory diseases (i.e., UC and CD), and in adolescents with obesity within Prevotella and Sutterella. More specifically, our results showed that the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and unclassified Lachnospiraceae was more than 10% and 8% higher, respectively, in the UC group compared to the CD, Ob, and HC groups. Additionally, the Ob group had over 20% and over 3% higher levels of Prevotella copri and unclassified Sutterella, respectively, compared to the UC, CD, and HC groups. Also, inspecting associations between the six specific microbiota and KO terms, we found that the six microbiota -relating KO terms were associated with NOD-like receptor signaling. These six taxa differences may affect the immune system and inflammatory response by affecting NOD-like receptor signaling in the host during critical adolescence. CONCLUSION: In this study, we discovered that dysbiosis of the microbial community had varying degrees of influence on the inflammatory and immune response pathways in adolescents with inflammatory diseases and obesity.

Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) is an effective treatment for active Crohn's disease (CD). This study explored the immunostimulatory potential of a cell-free fecal filtrate and related this with changes in the fecal microbiota and metabolites in children with active CD undertaking treatment with EEN. METHODS: Production of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was measured following their stimulation with cell-free fecal slurries from children with CD, before, during, and at completion of EEN. The metabolomic profile of the feces used was quantified using proton nuclear magnetic resonance and their microbiota composition with 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. RESULTS: Following treatment with EEN, 8 (72%) of 11 patients demonstrated a reduction in fecal calprotectin (FC) >50% and were subsequently labeled FC responders. In this subgroup, TNFα production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was reduced during EEN (P = .008) and reached levels like healthy control subjects. In parallel to these changes, the fecal concentrations of acetate, butyrate, propionate, choline, and uracil significantly decreased in FC responders, and p-cresol significantly increased. At EEN completion, TNFα production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was positively correlated with butyrate (rho = 0.70; P = .016). Microbiota structure (β diversity) was influenced by EEN treatment, and a total of 28 microbial taxa changed significantly in fecal calprotectin responders. At EEN completion, TNFα production positively correlated with the abundance of fiber fermenters from Lachnospiraceae_UCG-004 and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and negatively with Hungatella and Eisenbergiella tayi. CONCLUSIONS: This study offers proof-of concept data to suggest that the efficacy of EEN may result from modulation of diet-dependent microbes and their products that cause inflammation in patients with CD.

Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), dysbiosis, and immunosuppression who receive fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from healthy donors are at an increased risk of developing bacteremia. This study investigates the efficacy of a mixture of seven short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacterial strains (7-mix), the resulting culture supernatant mixture (mix-sup), and FMT for treating experimental ulcerative colitis (UC) and evaluates underlying mechanisms. METHODS: Utilizing culturomics, we isolated and cultured SCFA-producing bacteria from the stool of healthy donors. We used a mouse model of acute UC induced by dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to assess the effects of 7-mix, mix-sup, and FMT on intestinal inflammation and barrier function, microbial abundance and diversity, and gut macrophage polarization by flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and transwell assays. RESULTS: The abundance of several SCFA-producing bacterial taxa decreased in patients with UC. Seven-mix and mix-sup suppressed the inflammatory response and enhanced intestinal mucosal barrier function in the mouse model of UC to an extent similar to or superior to that of FMT. Moreover, 7-mix and mix-sup increased the abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria and SCFA concentrations in colitic mice. The effects of these interventions on the inflammatory response and gut barrier function were mediated by JAK/STAT3/FOXO3 axis inactivation in macrophages by inducing M2 macrophage polarization in vivo and in vitro. CONCLUSIONS: Our approach provides new opportunities to rationally harness live gut probiotic strains and metabolites to reduce intestinal inflammation, restore gut microbial composition, and expedite the development of safe and effective treatments for IBD.

This study aims to explore the influence of gut microbiota on subtypes of UC and CD, offering novel insights into the pathogenesis and treatment of UC and CD.Two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis was employed to examine the causal relationship between subtypes of UC and CD and gut microbiota composition. Gut microbiota data were sourced from the International Consortium MiBioGen, while UC and CD data were obtained from FINNGEN. Eligible single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected as instrumental variables. Multiple analytical approaches such as inverse variance-weighted (IVW), MR-Egger regression, weighted median, weighted mode, and MR-RAPS were utilized. Sensitivity analyses including MR-Egger intercept test, Cochran's Q test, and leave-one-out analysis were conducted for quality control. Subsequently, we employed multivariable IVW, MR-Egger, weighted median, and LASSO regression methods to identify independently significant genera or families and conducted sensitivity analyses. RESULTS: We have determined that Hungatella, Acidaminococcaceae, and 15 other microbial taxa act as protective factors for various CD and UC subtypes, while Terrisporobacter, Anaerostipes, and 23 other microbial taxa are associated with increased risk for different CD and UC subtypes. Furthermore, through multivariable MR analysis, we have identified significant genera or families with independent effects. CONCLUSION: Our study confirms a causal relationship between dysbiosis of gut microbiota and the occurrence of CD and UC subtypes. Furthermore, it validates etiological distinctions among different subtypes of CD and UC. A novel approach to adjunctive therapy involving distinct UC or CD subtypes may involve the use of probiotics and represents a potential avenue for future treatments.

Stool samples for gut microbiome analysis were prospectively collected from 57 patients with clinically stable UC between January 1 and December 31, 2022. Data from 57 individuals without inflammatory bowel disease (non-IBD) paired by age and sex were selected from our previous study as the control group. The fecal samples were subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Associations between gut microbiome profiles and clinical or colonoscopic assessments were examined using diversity and differential abundance analyses. RESULTS: Gut microbiome compositions between the patients with clinically stable UC and non-IBD controls differed significantly. Furthermore, gut microbiome compositions varied between the preserved and altered mucosa groups identified based on mucosal changes in the UC group. Differential abundance test of patients with UC for symptomatic remission based on stool frequency from the two-item patient-reported outcome identified several overlapping taxa specified as gut microbiome signatures, including the Enterobacteriaceae unknown genera (Enterobacteriaceae_g), Klebsiella, and several Lachnospiraceae spp. both in mucosal and symptom change analyses. CONCLUSIONS: The gut microbiome can change with mucosal changes, even in clinically stable UC, and some gut microbial signatures may explain the symptom manifestations in patients with UC showing significant mucosal changes.

Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) supplementation of the standard of care (SOC) augments steroid responsiveness in patients with acute severe ulcerative colitis (ASUC). EEN is known to alter gut microbial composition. The present study investigates EEN-driven gut microbial alterations in patients with ASUC and examines their correlations with clinical parameters. METHODS: Stool samples from patients with ASUC (n = 44) who received either EEN-supplemented SOC (EEN group; n = 20) or SOC alone (SOC group; n = 24) for 7 days were collected at baseline (day 0) and postintervention (day 7). Microbiome analysis was carried out using 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing followed by data processing using QIIME2 and R packages. RESULTS: Seven-day EEN-conjugated corticosteroid therapy in patients with ASUC enhanced the abundances of beneficial bacterial genera Faecalibacterium and Veillonella and reduced the abundance of Sphingomonas (generalized linear model fitted with Lasso regularization with robustness of 100%), while no such improvements in gut microbiota were observed in the SOC group. The EEN-associated taxa correlated with the patient's clinical parameters (serum albumin and C-reactive protein levels). Unlike the SOC group, which retained its preintervention core microbiota, EEN contributed Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a beneficial gut bacterial taxon, to the gut microbial core. EEN responders showed enhancement of Ligilactobacillus and Veillonella and reduction in Prevotella and Granulicatella. Analysis of baseline gut microbiota showed relative enhancement of certain microbial genera being associated with corticosteroid response and baseline clinical parameters and that this signature could conceivably be used as a predictive tool. CONCLUSIONS: Augmentation of clinical response by EEN-conjugated corticosteroid therapy is accompanied by beneficial gut microbial changes in patients with ASUC.

Biomarker discovery exploiting feature importance of machine learning has risen recently in the microbiome landscape with its high predictive performance in several disease states. To have a concrete selection among a high number of features, recursive feature elimination (RFE) has been widely used in the bioinformatics field. However, machine learning-based RFE has factors that decrease the stability of feature selection. In this article, we suggested methods to improve stability while sustaining performance. RESULTS: We exploited the abundance matrices of the gut microbiome (283 taxa at species level and 220 at genus level) to classify between patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and healthy control (1,569 samples). We found that applying an already published data transformation before RFE improves feature stability significantly. Moreover, we performed an in-depth evaluation of different variants of the data transformation and identify those that demonstrate better improvement in stability while not sacrificing classification performance. To ensure a robust comparison, we evaluated stability using various similarity metrics, distances, the common number of features, and the ability to filter out noise features. We were able to confirm that the mapping by the Bray-Curtis similarity matrix before RFE consistently improves the stability while maintaining good performance. Multilayer perceptron algorithm exhibited the highest performance among 8 different machine learning algorithms when a large number of features (a few hundred) were considered based on the best performance across 100 bootstrapped internal test sets. Conversely, when utilizing only a limited number of biomarkers as a trade-off between optimal performance and method generalizability, the random forest algorithm demonstrated the best performance. Using the optimal pipeline we developed, we identified 14 biomarkers for IBD at the species level and analyzed their roles using Shapley additive explanations. CONCLUSION: Taken together, our work not only showed how to improve biomarker discovery in the metataxonomic field without sacrificing classification performance but also provided useful insights for future comparative studies.

Microbiome studies report low gut microbial richness and diversity in ulcerative colitis (UC) patients. We explored whether UC patients who reach long-term clinical, endoscopic, and histological remission show a gut microbial ecosystem that is similar to healthy individuals. METHODS: We collected 184 stool samples from 111 individuals (UC patients in long remission, short remission, flare, and healthy control subjects). Microbiota was analyzed by amplicon sequencing (16S ribosomal RNA) and quantitative polymerase chain reaction for specific taxa. All UC remission patients were followed-up for 2 years. FINDINGS: A drop in species diversity and richness, underrepresentation of butyrate producers, and gain of potentially harmful bacteria were significantly detected in samples from disease-flare and short-remission patients. In contrast, Chao1 and Shannon indexes of diversity did not differ among patients in long remission and healthy control subjects. Long-remission patients also presented fecal bacterial composition closer to that in healthy control subjects. There was a positive correlation between Akkermansia muciniphila abundance and time in remission (rs = 0.53, P < .001). Logistic regression analysis showed that a high Shannon index (odds ratio, 4.83; 95% confidence interval, 1.5-20.6) or presence of A. muciniphila (odds ratio, 4.9; 95% confidence interval, 1.12-29.08) in fecal samples at entry was independently associated with clinical remission over a follow-up period of 24 months. INTERPRETATION: UC patients who achieve long-term remission show evidence of substantial recovery of the gut microbial ecosystem in terms of diversity and composition. Recovery may just reflect adequate control of inflammatory activity, but higher bacterial diversity or the presence of A. muciniphila in fecal samples predicts flare-free outcomes.

Pediatric inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory intestinal disease that affects both children and adolescents. Symptoms can significantly affect a child's growth, development, and quality of life, making early diagnosis and effective management crucial. This study focuses on treatment-naïve pediatric IBD patients and their immediate families to identify the role of the microbiome in disease onset. METHODS: Nine families with pediatric IBD were recruited, comprising seven drug-naïve Crohn's disease (CD) patients and two drug-naïve ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, as well as twenty-four healthy siblings/parents. Fecal samples were collected for 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. RESULTS: We identified patterns of dysbiosis and hallmark microbial taxa among patients who shared ethnic, habitual, and dietary traits with themselves and their families. In addition, we examined the impact of the disease on specific microbial taxa and how these could serve as potential biomarkers for early detection. CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a potential role of maternal factors in the establishment and modulation of the early life microbiome, consistent with the current literature, which may have implications for understanding the etiology and progression of IBD.

Crohn's diseases and ulcerative colitis, both of which are chronic immune-mediated disorders of the gastrointestinal tract are major contributors to the overarching Inflammatory bowel diseases. It has become increasingly evident that the pathological processes of IBDs results from interactions between genetic and environmental factors, which can skew immune responses against normal intestinal flora. METHODS: The aim of this study is to assess and analyze the taxa diversity and relative abundances in CD and UC in the Saudi population. We utilized a sequencing strategy that targets all variable regions in the 16 S rRNA gene using the Swift Amplicon 16 S rRNA Panel on Illumina NovaSeq 6000. RESULTS: The composition of stool 16 S rRNA was analyzed from 219 patients with inflammatory bowel disease and from 124 healthy controls. We quantified the abundance of microbial communities to examine any significant differences between subpopulations of samples. At the genus level, two genera in particular, Veillonella and Lachnoclostridium showed significant association with CD versus controls. There were significant differences between subjects with CD versus UC, with the top differential genera spanning Akkermansia, Harryflintia, Maegamonas and Phascolarctobacterium. Furthermore, statistically significant taxa diversity in microbiome composition was observed within the UC and CD groups. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion we have shown that there are significant differences in gut microbiota between UC, CD and controls in a Saudi Arabian inflammatory bowel disease cohort. This reinforces the need for further studies in large populations that are ethnically and geographically diverse. In addition, our results show the potential to develop classifiers that may have add additional richness of context to clinical diagnosis of UC and CD with larger inflammatory bowel disease cohorts.

We performed 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing on stool samples of 277 patients (72 CD, 103 AAU, and 102 SpA) included in the German Spondyloarthritis Inception Cohort and 62 back pain controls without any inflammatory disorder. Discriminatory statistical methods were used to disentangle microbial disease signals from one another and a wide range of potential confounders. Patients were naive to or had not received treatment with biological disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) for >3 months before enrollment, providing a better approximation of a true baseline disease signal. RESULTS: We identified a shared, immune-mediated disease signal represented by low abundances of Lachnospiraceae taxa relative to controls, most notably Fusicatenibacter, which was most abundant in controls receiving nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug monotherapy and implied to partially mediate higher serum C-reactive protein. Patients with SpA showed an enrichment of Collinsella, whereas human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27+ individuals displayed enriched Faecalibacterium. CD patients had higher abundances of a Ruminococcus taxon, and previous conventional/synthetic DMARD therapy was associated with increased Akkermansia. CONCLUSION: Our work supports the existence of a common gut dysbiosis in SpA and related inflammatory pathologies. We reveal shared and disease-specific microbial associations and suggest potential mediators of disease activity. Validation studies are needed to clarify the role of Fusicatenibacter in gut-joint inflammation, and metagenomic resolution is needed to understand the relationship between Faecalibacterium commensals and HLA-B27.

Corticosteroids are used for induction of remission in patients with moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. However, up to one-third of patients fail to this therapy. We investigated if fecal microbial composition or its metabolic capacity are associated with response to systemic corticosteroids. METHODS: In this prospective, multicenter study, patients with active ulcerative colitis (Lichtiger score ≥4) receiving systemic corticosteroids were eligible. Data were assessed and fecal samples collected before and after 4 weeks of treatment. Patients were divided into responders (decrease of Lichtiger Score ≥50%) and nonresponders. The fecal microbiome was assessed by the 16S rRNA gene marker and analyzed with QIIME 2. Microbial metabolic pathways were predicted using parsimonious flux balance analysis. RESULTS: Among 93 included patients, 69 (74%) patients responded to corticosteroids after 4 weeks. At baseline, responders could not be distinguished from nonresponders by microbial diversity and composition, except for a subgroup of biologic-naïve patients. Within 4 weeks of treatment, responders experienced changes in beta diversity with enrichment of ascribed beneficial taxa, including Blautia, Anaerostipes, and Bifidobacterium, as well as an increase in predicted butyrate synthesis. Nonresponders had only minor longitudinal taxonomic changes with a significant increase of Streptococcus salivarius and a microbial composition shifting away from responders. CONCLUSION: Baseline microbial diversity and composition seem to be of limited use to predict response to systemic corticosteroids in active ulcerative colitis. Response is longitudinally associated with restoration of microbial composition and its metabolic capacity.

In this prospective cohort study, 3483 healthy first-degree relatives (FDRs) of patients with CD were recruited to identify the gut microbiome composition that precedes the onset of CD and to what extent this composition predicts the risk of developing CD. We applied a machine learning approach to the analysis of the gut microbiome composition (based on 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing) to define a microbial signature that associates with future development of CD. The performance of the model was assessed in an independent validation cohort. RESULTS: In the validation cohort, the microbiome risk score (MRS) model yielded a hazard ratio of 2.24 (95% confidence interval, 1.03-4.84; P = .04), using the median of the MRS from the discovery cohort as the threshold. The MRS demonstrated a temporal validity by capturing individuals that developed CD up to 5 years before disease onset (area under the curve > 0.65). The 5 most important taxa contributing to the MRS included Ruminococcus torques, Blautia, Colidextribacter, an uncultured genus-level group from Oscillospiraceae, and Roseburia. CONCLUSION: This study is the first to demonstrate that gut microbiome composition is associated with future onset of CD and suggests that gut microbiome is a contributor in the pathogenesis of CD.

We proposed a novel method to identify underlying microbial modules, i.e. groups of taxa with similar abundance patterns affected by a common latent factor, from longitudinal gut microbiota and applied it to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The identified modules demonstrated closer intragroup relationships, indicating potential microbe-microbe interactions and influences of underlying factors. Associations between the modules and several clinical factors were investigated, especially disease states. The IBD-associated modules performed better in stratifying the subjects compared with the relative abundance of individual taxa. The modules were further validated in external cohorts, demonstrating the efficacy of the proposed method in identifying general and robust microbial modules. The study reveals the benefit of considering the ecological effects in gut microbiota analysis and the great promise of linking clinical factors with underlying microbial modules. AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: https://github.com/rwang-z/microbial_module.git.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic relapsing-remitting disease. An adverse immune reaction toward the intestinal microbiota is involved in the pathophysiology and microbial perturbations are associated with IBD in general and with flares specifically. Although medical drugs are the cornerstone of current treatment, responses vary widely between patients and drugs. The intestinal microbiota can metabolize medical drugs, which may influence IBD drug (non-)response and side effects. Conversely, several drugs can impact the intestinal microbiota and thereby host effects. This review provides a comprehensive overview of current evidence on bidirectional interactions between the microbiota and relevant IBD drugs (pharmacomicrobiomics). METHODS: Electronic literature searches were conducted in PubMed, Web of Science and Cochrane databases to identify relevant publications. Studies reporting on microbiota composition and/or drug metabolism were included. RESULTS: The intestinal microbiota can both enzymatically activate IBD pro-drugs (e.g., in case of thiopurines), but also inactivate certain drugs (e.g., mesalazine by acetylation via N-acetyltransferase 1 and infliximab via IgG-degrading enzymes). Aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, thiopurines, calcineurin inhibitors, anti-tumor necrosis factor biologicals and tofacitinib were all reported to alter the intestinal microbiota composition, including changes in microbial diversity and/or relative abundances of various microbial taxa. CONCLUSION: Various lines of evidence have shown the ability of the intestinal microbiota to interfere with IBD drugs and vice versa. These interactions can influence treatment response, but well-designed clinical studies and combined in vivo and ex vivo models are needed to achieve consistent findings and evaluate clinical relevance.

Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is common in patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and has been reported as a risk factor for poor outcome. However, gut microbiome and mycobiome of IBD patients with CDI have been barely investigated. This study aimed to assess the gut microbiome and mycobiome in IBD patients with CDI. METHODS: We collected fecal samples from patients with active IBD and concomitant CDI (IBD-CDI group, n=25), patients with active IBD and no CDI (IBD-only group, n=51), and healthy subjects (HC, n=40). Patients' characteristics including demographic data, disease severity, and medication history were collected. Metagenomic sequencing, taxonomic and functional analysis were carried out in the samples. RESULTS: We found that the bacterial alpha diversity of the IBD-CDI group was decreased. The bacterial and fungal beta diversity variations between IBD patients and HC were significant, regardless of CDI status. But the IBD-CDI group did not significantly cluster separately from the IBD-only group. Several bacterial taxa, including Enterococcus faecium, Ruminococcus gnavus, and Clostridium innocuum were overrepresented in the IBD-CDI group. Furthermore, IBD patients with CDI were distinguished by several fungal taxa, including overrepresentation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We also identified functional differences in IBD patients with CDI include enrichment of peptidoglycan biosynthesis. The network analysis indicated specific interactions between microbial markers in IBD-CDI patients. CONCLUSION: IBD patients with CDI had pronounced microbial dysbiosis. Gut micro-ecological changes in IBD patients with CDI might provide insight into the pathological process and potential strategies for diagnosis and treatment in this subset of patients.

Fecal Microbiota Transplant (FMT) has proven effective in treating recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (rCDI) and has shown some success in treating inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). There is emerging evidence that host engraftment of donor taxa is a tenet of successful FMT. However, there is little known regarding predictors of engraftment. We undertook a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study to characterize the response to FMT in children and young adults with mild to moderate active Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). RESULTS: Subjects with CD or UC were randomized to receive antibiotics and weekly FMT or placebo in addition to baseline medications. The treatment arm received seven days of antibiotics followed by FMT enema and then capsules weekly for seven weeks. We enrolled four subjects with CD and 11 with UC, ages 14-29 years. Due to weekly stool sampling, we were able to create a time series of alpha diversity, beta diversity and engraftment as they related to clinical response. Subjects exhibited a wide range of microbial diversity and donor engraftment as FMT progressed. Specifically, engraftment ranged from 26% to 90% at week 2 and 3% to 92% at two months. Consistent with the current literature, increases over time of both alpha diversity (p< 0.05) and donor engraftment (p< 0.05) correlated with improved clinical response. Additionally, our weekly time series enabled an investigation into the clinical and microbial correlates of engraftment at various time points. We discovered that the post-antibiotic but pre-FMT time point, often overlooked in FMT trials, was rich in microbial correlates of eventual engraftment. Greater residual alpha diversity after antibiotic treatment was positively correlated with engraftment and subsequent clinical response. Interestingly, a transient rise in the relative abundance of Lactobacillus was also positively correlated with engraftment, a finding that we recapitulated with our analysis of another FMT trial with publicly available weekly sequencing data. CONCLUSIONS: We found that higher residual alpha diversity and Lactobacillus blooms after antibiotic treatment correlated with improved engraftment and clinical response to FMT. Future studies should closely examine the host microbial communities pre-FMT and the impact of antibiotic preconditioning on engraftment and response.

Microbial communities have long been suspected to influence inflammatory processes in the gastrointestinal tract of patients with inflammatory bowel disease. However, these effects are often influenced by treatments and can rarely be analyzed in treatment-naïve onset cases. Specifically, microbial differences between IBD pathologies in new onset cases have rarely been investigated and can provide novel insight into the dynamics of the microbiota in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). METHODS: Fifty-six treatment-naïve IBD onset patients (67.3% CD, 32.7% UC) and 97 healthy controls were recruited from the Maltese population. Stool samples were collected after diagnosis but before administration of anti-inflammatory treatments. Fecal microbial communities were assessed via 16S rRNA gene sequencing and subjected to ecological analyses to determine disease-specific differences between pathologies and disease subtypes or to predict future treatment options. RESULTS: We identified significant differences in community composition, variability, and diversity between healthy and diseased individuals-but only small to no differences between the newly diagnosed, treatment-naïve UC and CD cohorts. Network analyses revealed massive turnover of bacterial interactions between healthy and diseased communities, as well as between CD and UC communities, as signs of disease-specific changes of community dynamics. Furthermore, we identified taxa and community characteristics serving as predictors for prospective treatments. CONCLUSION: Untreated and newly diagnosed IBD shows clear differences from healthy microbial communities and an elevated level of disturbance, but only the network perspective revealed differences between pathologies. Furthermore, future IBD treatment is to some extent predictable by microbial community characteristics.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is an effective treatment of recurrent Clostridioides difficile infections (rCDI), but has more limited efficacy in treating either ulcerative colitis (UC) or Crohn's disease (CD), two major forms of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). We hypothesize that FMT recipients with rCDI and/or IBD have baseline fecal bile acid (BA) compositions that differ significantly from that of their healthy donors and that FMT will normalize the BA compositions. AIM: To study the effect of single colonoscopic FMT on microbial composition and function in four recipient groups: 1.) rCDI patients without IBD (rCDI-IBD); 2.) rCDI with IBD (rCDI+IBD); 3.) UC patients without rCDI (UC-rCDI); 4.) CD patients without rCDI (CD-rCDI). METHODS: We performed 16S rRNA gene sequence, shotgun DNA sequence and quantitative bile acid metabolomic analyses on stools collected from 55 pairs of subjects and donors enrolled in two prospective single arm FMT clinical trials (Clinical Trials.gov ID NCT03268213, 479696, UC no rCDI ≥ 2x IND 1564 and NCT03267238, IND 16795). Fitted linear mixed models were used to examine the effects of four recipient groups, FMT status (Donor, pre-FMT, 1-week post-FMT, 3-months post-FMT) and first order Group*FMT interactions on microbial diversity and composition, bile acid metabolites and bile acid metabolizing enzyme gene abundance. RESULTS: The pre-FMT stools collected from rCDI ± IBD recipients had reduced α-diversity compared to the healthy donor stools and was restored post-FMT. The α-diversity in the pre-FMT stools collected from UC-rCDI or CD-rCDI recipients did not differ significantly from donor stools. FMT normalized some recipient/donor ratios of genus level taxa abundance in the four groups. Fecal secondary BA levels, including some of the secondary BA epimers that exhibit in vitro immunomodulatory activities, were lower in rCDI±IBD and CD-rCDI but not UC-rCDI recipients compared to donors. FMT restored secondary BA levels. Metagenomic baiE gene and some of the eight bile salt hydrolase (BSH) phylotype abundances were significantly correlated with fecal BA levels. CONCLUSION: Restoration of multiple secondary BA levels, including BA epimers implicated in immunoregulation, are associated with restoration of fecal baiE gene counts, suggesting that the 7-α-dehydroxylation step is rate-limiting.

Dozens of studies have demonstrated gut dysbiosis in COVID-19 patients during the acute and recovery phases. However, a consensus on the specific COVID-19 associated bacteria is missing. In this study, we performed a meta-analysis to explore whether robust and reproducible alterations in the gut microbiota of COVID-19 patients exist across different populations. METHODS: A systematic review was conducted for studies published prior to May 2022 in electronic databases. After review, we included 16 studies that comparing the gut microbiota in COVID-19 patients to those of controls. The 16S rRNA sequence data of these studies were then re-analyzed using a standardized workflow and synthesized by meta-analysis. RESULTS: We found that gut bacterial diversity of COVID-19 patients in both the acute and recovery phases was consistently lower than non-COVID-19 individuals. Microbial differential abundance analysis showed depletion of anti-inflammatory butyrate-producing bacteria and enrichment of taxa with pro-inflammatory properties in COVID-19 patients during the acute phase compared to non-COVID-19 individuals. Analysis of microbial communities showed that the gut microbiota of COVID-19 recovered patients were still in unhealthy ecostates. CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided a comprehensive synthesis to better understand gut microbial perturbations associated with COVID-19 and identified underlying biomarkers for microbiome-based diagnostics and therapeutics.

We sought to take advantage of the numerous and diverse studies characterizing the microbiome in IBD to develop a multi-technology meta-analysis (MTMA) as a platform for aggregation of independently generated datasets, irrespective of DNA-profiling technique, in order to uncover the consistent microbial modulators of disease. We report the largest strain-level survey of IBD, integrating microbiome profiles from 3,407 samples from 21 datasets spanning 15 cohorts, three of which are presented for the first time in the current study, characterized using three DNA-profiling technologies, mapping all nucleotide data against known, culturable strain reference data. RESULTS: We identify several novel IBD associations with culturable strains that have so far remained elusive, including two genome-sequenced but uncharacterized Lachnospiraceae strains consistently decreased in both the gut luminal and mucosal contents of patients with IBD, and demonstrate that these strains are correlated with inflammation-related pathways that are known mechanisms targeted for treatment. Furthermore, comparative MTMA at the species versus strain level reveals that not all significant strain associations resulted in a corresponding species-level significance and conversely significant species associations are not always re-captured at the strain level. CONCLUSION: We propose MTMA for uncovering experimentally testable strain-disease associations that, as demonstrated here, are beneficial in discovering mechanisms underpinning microbiome impact on disease or novel targets for therapeutic interventions.

Numerous studies have examined the gut microbial ecology of patients with Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis, but inflammatory bowel disease-associated taxa and ecological effect sizes are not consistent between studies. METHODS: We systematically searched PubMed and Google Scholar and performed a meta-analysis of 13 studies to analyze how variables such as sample type (stool, biopsy, and lavage) affect results in inflammatory bowel disease gut microbiome studies, using uniform bioinformatic methods for all primary data. RESULTS: Reduced alpha diversity was a consistent feature of both CD and ulcerative colitis but was more pronounced in CD. Disease contributed significantly variation in beta diversity in most studies, but effect size varied, and the effect of sample type was greater than the effect of disease. Fusobacterium was the genus most consistently associated with CD, but disease-associated genera were mostly inconsistent between studies. Stool studies had lower heterogeneity than biopsy studies, especially for CD. CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that sample type variation is an important contributor to study variability that should be carefully considered during study design, and stool is likely superior to biopsy for CD studies due to its lower heterogeneity.

Crohn's disease (CD), an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) subtype, results from pathologic interactions between host cells and its resident gut microbes. CD manifests in both isolated disease locations (ileum or colon) or a combination of locations (ileocolonic). To date, a comprehensive understanding of how isolated CD subtypes influence molecular profiles remains outstanding. To address this, we sought to define CD location signatures by leveraging a large cross-sectional feature set captured from the stool of over 200 IBD patients and healthy controls using metaproteomics, shotgun metagenomics, 16S rRNA sequencing, metabolomic profiling, and host genetics paired with clinical endoscopic assessments. RESULTS: Neither metagenomic nor host genetics alone distinguished CD location subtypes. In contrast, ileal and colonic CD were distinguished using mass spectrometry-based methods (metabolomics or metaproteomics) or a combined multi-omic feature set. This multi-omic feature set revealed colonic CD was strongly associated with neutrophil-related proteins. Additionally, colonic CD displayed a disease-severity-related association with Bacteroides vulgatus. Colonic CD and ulcerative colitis profiles harbored strikingly similar feature enrichments compared to ileal CD, including neutrophil-related protein enrichments. Compared to colonic CD, ileal CD profiles displayed increased primary and secondary bile acid levels and concomitant shifts in taxa with noted sensitivities such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii or affinities for bile acid-rich environments, including Gammaproteobacteria and Blautia sp. Having shown robust molecular and microbial distinctions tied to CD locations, we leveraged these profiles to generate location-specific disease severity biomarkers that surpass the performance of Calprotectin. CONCLUSIONS: When compared using multi-omics features, colonic- and ileal-isolated CD subtypes display striking differences that suggest separate location-specific pathologies. Colonic CD's strong similarity to ulcerative colitis, including neutrophil and Bacteroides vulgatus involvement, is also evidence of a shared pathology for colonic-isolated IBD subtypes, while ileal CD maintains a unique, bile acid-driven profile. More broadly, this study demonstrates the power of multi-omics approaches for IBD biomarker discovery and elucidating the underlying biology. Video Abstract.

With the rapid accumulation of microbiome-wide association studies, a great amount of microbiome data are available to study the microbiome's role in human disease and advance the microbiome's potential use for disease prediction. However, the unique features of microbiome data hinder its utility for disease prediction. METHODS: Motivated from the polygenic risk score framework, we propose a microbial risk score (MRS) framework to aggregate the complicated microbial profile into a summarized risk score that can be used to measure and predict disease susceptibility. Specifically, the MRS algorithm involves two steps: (1) identifying a sub-community consisting of the signature microbial taxa associated with disease and (2) integrating the identified microbial taxa into a continuous score. The first step is carried out using the existing sophisticated microbial association tests and pruning and thresholding method in the discovery samples. The second step constructs a community-based MRS by calculating alpha diversity on the identified sub-community in the validation samples. Moreover, we propose a multi-omics data integration method by jointly modeling the proposed MRS and other risk scores constructed from other omics data in disease prediction. RESULTS: Through three comprehensive real-data analyses using the NYU Langone Health COVID-19 cohort, the gut microbiome health index (GMHI) multi-study cohort, and a large type 1 diabetes cohort separately, we exhibit and evaluate the utility of the proposed MRS framework for disease prediction and multi-omics data integration. In addition, the disease-specific MRSs for colorectal adenoma, colorectal cancer, Crohn's disease, and rheumatoid arthritis based on the relative abundances of 5, 6, 12, and 6 microbial taxa, respectively, are created and validated using the GMHI multi-study cohort. Especially, Crohn's disease MRS achieves AUCs of 0.88 (0.85-0.91) and 0.86 (0.78-0.95) in the discovery and validation cohorts, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: The proposed MRS framework sheds light on the utility of the microbiome data for disease prediction and multi-omics integration and provides a great potential in understanding the microbiome's role in disease diagnosis and prognosis. Video Abstract.

We used the Crohn's and Colitis Canada Genetic Environmental Microbial (CCC-GEM) cohort of healthy first-degree relatives of patients with Crohn's disease. Gut barrier function was assessed using the urinary fractional excretion of lactulose-to-mannitol ratio (LMR). Microbiome composition was assessed by sequencing fecal 16S ribosomal RNA. The cohort was divided into a discovery cohort (n = 2472) and a validation cohort (n = 655). A regression model was used to assess microbial associations with the LMR. A random forest classifier algorithm was performed to assess microbial community contribution to barrier function. RESULTS: Individuals with impaired barrier function (LMR >0.025) had reduced alpha-diversity (Chao1 index, P = 4.0e-4) and altered beta-diversity (Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index, R2 = 0.001, P = 1.0e-3) compared with individuals with an LMR ≤0.025. When taxa were assessed individually, we identified 8 genera and 52 microbial pathways associated with an LMR >0.025 (q < 0.05). Four genera (decreased prevalence of Adlercreutzia, Clostridia UCG 014, and Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and increased abundance of Colidextribacter) and 8 pathways (including decreased biosynthesis of glutamate, tryptophan, and threonine) were replicated in the validation cohort. The random forest approach revealed that the bacterial community is associated with gut barrier function (area under the curve, 0.63; P = 1.4e-6). CONCLUSIONS: The gut microbiome community and pathways are associated with changes in gut barrier function. These findings may identify potential microbial targets to modulate gut barrier.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) including Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC) are characterized by chronic and debilitating gut inflammation. Altered bacterial communities of the intestine are strongly associated with IBD initiation and progression. The gut virome, which is primarily composed of bacterial viruses (bacteriophages, phages), is thought to be an important factor regulating and shaping microbial communities in the gut. While alterations in the gut virome have been observed in IBD patients, the contribution of these viruses to alterations in the bacterial community and heightened inflammatory responses associated with IBD patients remains largely unknown. RESULTS: Here, we performed in vivo microbial cross-infection experiments to follow the effects of fecal virus-like particles (VLPs) isolated from UC patients and healthy controls on bacterial diversity and severity of experimental colitis in human microbiota-associated (HMA) mice. Shotgun metagenomics confirmed that several phages were transferred to HMA mice, resulting in treatment-specific alterations in the gut virome. VLPs from healthy and UC patients also shifted gut bacterial diversity of these mice, an effect that was amplified during experimental colitis. VLPs isolated from UC patients specifically altered the relative abundance of several bacterial taxa previously implicated in IBD progression. Additionally, UC VLP administration heightened colitis severity in HMA mice, as indicated by shortened colon length and increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Importantly, this effect was dependent on intact VLPs. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings build on recent literature indicating that phages are dynamic regulators of bacterial communities in the gut and implicate the intestinal virome in modulating intestinal inflammation and disease. Video Abstract.

Multiple studies have confirmed dysbiosis in ankylosing spondylitis (AS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); however, due to methodological differences across studies, it has not been possible to determine if these diseases have similar or different gut microbiomes. RESULTS: In this study, faecal and intestinal biopsies were obtained from 33 Australian AS patients (including 5 with concomitant IBD, 'AS-IBD'), 59 IBD patients and 105 healthy controls. Stool samples were also obtained from 16 Italian AS patients and 136 Swedish AS patients. Focusing on the Australian cohort, AS, AS-IBD and IBD patients differed from one another and from healthy controls in both alpha and beta diversity. AS patients with and without clinical IBD could be distinguished from one another with moderate accuracy using stool microbiome (AUC=0.754). Stool microbiome also accurately distinguished IBD patients from healthy controls (AUC=0.757). Microbiome composition was correlated with disease activity measured by BASDAI and faecal calprotectin (FCP) levels. Enrichment of potentially pathogenic Streptococcus was noted in AS, AS-IBD and IBD patients. Furthermore, enrichment of another potentially pathogenic genus, Haemophilus, was observed in AS, AS-IBD, IBD, AS patients with increased BASDAI, and IBD patients with faecal calprotectin >100 μg/mg. Apart from these genera, no other taxa were shared between AS and IBD patients. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the distinct gut microbiome of AS and AS-IBD patients compared to IBD patients and healthy controls is consistent with immunological and genetic evidence suggesting that the gut plays a different role in driving AS compared with IBD. However, enrichment of two potentially pathogenic genera in both diseases suggests that the presence of a shared/common microbial trigger of disease cannot be discounted.

Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has previously been explored as a treatment for ulcerative colitis (UC) however, biomarkers that predict and / or are associated with clinical response are poorly defined. The aim of this systematic review was to identify donor and recipient clinical, microbial and metabolomic predictive biomarkers of response to FMT in UC. METHODS: A systematic search of the relevant literature of studies exploring FMT in UC was conducted. Data on microbial diversity, taxonomic changes, metabolic changes, donor and recipient microbiota relationship and baseline predictors was examined. FINDINGS: 2852 studies were screened, and 25 papers were included in this systematic review. Following FMT, alpha diversity was seen to increase in responders along with increases in the abundance of Clostridiales clusters (order) and Bacteroides genus. Metabolomic analysis revealed short chain fatty acid (SCFA) production as a marker of FMT success. Donors or FMT batches with higher microbial alpha diversity and a greater abundance of taxa belonging to certain Bacteroides and Clostridia clusters were associated with clinical response to FMT. Baseline clinical predictors of response in patients with UC included younger age, less severe disease and possibly shorter disease duration. Baseline recipient microbial predictors at response consisted of higher faecal species richness, greater abundance of Candida and donor microbial profile similarity. INTERPRETATION: Distinct changes in gut microbiota profiles post-FMT indicate that certain baseline characteristics along with specific microbial and metabolomic alterations may predispose patients towards a successful therapeutic outcome. Opportunities towards a biomarker led precision medicine approach with FMT should be explored in future clinical studies. FUNDING: There no specific funding to declare.

As part of the Genetic, Environmental, Microbial (GEM) Project, we recruited a cohort of 2289 healthy FDRs of patients with CD. Individuals provided stool samples and answered a validated food frequency questionnaire reflecting their habitual diet during the year before sample collection. Unsupervised analysis identified 3 dietary and 3 microbial composition clusters. RESULTS: DC3, resembling the Mediterranean diet, was strongly associated with a defined microbial composition, with an increased abundance of fiber-degrading bacteria, such as Ruminococcus, as well as taxa such as Faecalibacterium. The DC3 diet was also significantly associated with lower levels of subclinical gut inflammation, defined by fecal calprotectin, compared with other dietary patterns. No significant associations were found between individual food items and fecal calprotectin, suggesting that long-term dietary patterns rather than individual food items contribute to subclinical gut inflammation. Additionally, mediation analysis demonstrated that DC3 had a direct effect on subclinical inflammation that was partially mediated by the microbiota. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results indicated that Mediterranean-like dietary patterns are associated with microbiome and lower intestinal inflammation. This study will help guide future dietary strategies that affect microbial composition and host gut inflammation to prevent diseases.

Pre- and post-intervention mucosal biopsies, tissue, and fecal samples were collected from HBOT phase 2 clinical trials. Biopsies and fecal samples were subjected to shotgun metaproteomics, metabolomics, 16s rRNA sequencing, and metagenomics. Tissue was subjected to bulk RNA sequencing and digital spatial profiling (DSP) for single-cell RNA and protein analysis, and immunohistochemistry was performed. Fecal samples were also used for colonization experiments in IL10-/- germ-free UC mouse models. RESULTS: Proteomics identified negative associations between HBOT response and neutrophil azurophilic granule abundance. DSP identified an HBOT-specific reduction of neutrophil STAT3, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. HBOT decreased microbial diversity with a proportional increase in Firmicutes and a secondary bile acid lithocholic acid. A major source of the reduction in diversity was the loss of mucus-adherent taxa, resulting in increased MUC2 levels post-HBOT. Targeted database searching revealed strain-level associations between Akkermansia muciniphila and HBOT response status. Colonization of IL10-/- with stool obtained from HBOT responders resulted in lower colitis activity compared with non-responders, with no differences in STAT3 expression, suggesting complementary but independent host and microbial responses. CONCLUSIONS: HBOT reduces host neutrophil STAT3 and azurophilic granule activity in UC patients and changes in microbial composition and metabolism in ways that improve colitis activity. Intestinal microbiota, especially strain level variations in A muciniphila, may contribute to HBOT non-response.

Host-microbe interactions are crucial for normal physiological and immune system development and are implicated in a variety of diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), colorectal cancer (CRC), obesity, and type 2 diabetes (T2D). Despite large-scale case-control studies aimed at identifying microbial taxa or genes involved in pathogeneses, the mechanisms linking them to disease have thus far remained elusive. RESULTS: To identify potential pathways through which human-associated bacteria impact host health, we leverage publicly-available interspecies protein-protein interaction (PPI) data to find clusters of microbiome-derived proteins with high sequence identity to known human-protein interactors. We observe differential targeting of putative human-interacting bacterial genes in nine independent metagenomic studies, finding evidence that the microbiome broadly targets human proteins involved in immune, oncogenic, apoptotic, and endocrine signaling pathways in relation to IBD, CRC, obesity, and T2D diagnoses. CONCLUSIONS: This host-centric analysis provides a mechanistic hypothesis-generating platform and extensively adds human functional annotation to commensal bacterial proteins.

A prospective observational study including children age 6-18 years with a diagnosis of perianal fistulising CD was conducted. Stool samples and rectal and perianal fistula swabs were collected. Stool samples and rectal swabs from children with CD without perianal disease and healthy children were included as comparison. Whole shotgun metagenomic sequencing was performed. RESULTS: A total of 31 children [mean age 15.5 ± 3.5 years] with perianal CD were prospectively enrolled. The fistula-associated microbiome showed an increase in alpha diversity and alteration in the abundance of several taxa compared with the rectal- and faecal-associated microbiome with key taxa belonging to the Proteobacteria phylum. Genes conferring resistance to the clinically used antibiotic regimen ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were found in the three sample types. In comparison with children without the perianal phenotype [N = 36] and healthy controls [N = 41], the mucosally-associated microbiome of children with perianal CD harboured a reduced butyrogenic potential. Linear discriminant analysis identified key taxa distinguishing the rectal mucosally-associated microbiome of children with perianal CD from children without this phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: The microbial community within CD-related anorectal fistula is compositionally and functionally unique. Taken together, these findings emphasise the need to better understand the ecosystem of the fistula milieu to guide development of novel microbiome-based strategies in this CD phenotype.

Gut microbial alteration is implicated in inflammatory bowel disease but is noted in other diseases. Systematic comparison to define similarities and specificities is hampered since most studies focus on a single disease. RESULTS: We develop a pipeline to compare between disease cohorts starting from the raw V4 16S amplicon sequence variants. Including 12,838 subjects, from 59 disease cohorts, we demonstrate a predominant shared signature across diseases, indicating a common bacterial response to different diseases. We show that classifiers trained on one disease cohort predict relatively well other diseases due to this shared signal, and hence, caution should be taken when using such classifiers in real-world scenarios, where diseases are intermixed. Based on this common signature across a large array of diseases, we develop a universal dysbiosis index that successfully differentiates between cases and controls across various diseases and can be used for prioritizing fecal donors and samples with lower disease probability. Finally, we identify a set of IBD-specific bacteria, which can direct mechanistic studies and design of IBD-specific microbial interventions. CONCLUSIONS: A robust non-specific general response of the gut microbiome is detected in a large array of diseases. Disease classifiers may confuse between different diseases due to this shared microbial response. Our universal dysbiosis index can be used as a tool to prioritize fecal samples and donors. Finally, the IBD-specific taxa may indicate a more direct association to gut inflammation and disease pathogenesis, and those can be further used as biomarkers and as future targets for interventions.

We present MIMOSA2, an R package and web application for model-based integrative analysis of microbiome-metabolome datasets. MIMOSA2 uses genomic and metabolic reference databases to construct a community metabolic model based on microbiome data and uses this model to predict differences in metabolite levels across samples. These predictions are compared with metabolomics data to identify putative microbiome-governed metabolites and taxonomic contributors to metabolite variation. MIMOSA2 supports various input data types and customization with user-defined metabolic pathways. We establish MIMOSA2's ability to identify ground truth microbial mechanisms in simulation datasets, compare its results with experimentally inferred mechanisms in honeybee microbiota, and demonstrate its application in two human studies of inflammatory bowel disease. Overall, MIMOSA2 combines reference databases, a validated statistical framework, and a user-friendly interface to facilitate modeling and evaluating relationships between members of the microbiota and their metabolic products. AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: MIMOSA2 is implemented in R under the GNU General Public License v3.0 and is freely available as a web server at http://elbo-spice.cs.tau.ac.il/shiny/MIMOSA2shiny/ and as an R package from http://www.borensteinlab.com/software_MIMOSA2.html. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.

Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease. Its etiology remains largely unknown, although frequent concomitant inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) hints towards common factors underlying intestinal and bile duct inflammation. Herein, we aimed to explore the relative abundance of fecal microbiota in PSC-IBD patients compared to IBD-only subjects and controls. METHODS AND RESULTS: We included 14 PSC-IBD patients, 12 IBD-only patients, and 8 healthy controls (HCs). A quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) assay was used to determine a selection of bacterial phyla, families, and genera. Relative abundance of taxa showed that Bacteroidetes was the most abundant phylum among the patients with PSC-IBD (29.46%) and also HCs (39.34%), whereas the bacterial species belonging to the phylum Firmicutes were the most frequent group in IBD-only subjects (37.61%). The relative abundance of the Enterobacteriaceae family in fecal samples of PSC-IBD patients was similar to those with IBD-only, which was significantly higher than HCs (p value = 0.031), and thus, could be used as a PSC-IBD or IBD-only associated microbial signature. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings showed that intestinal microbiota composition in PSC-IBD patients was completely different from that of IBD-only patients. Further studies using large-scale cohorts should be performed to better describe the contribution of the gut microbiota to PSC pathogenesis with underlying IBD.

Gastrointestinal surgery imparts dramatic and lasting imbalances, or dysbiosis, to the composition of finely tuned microbial ecosystems. The aim of the present study was to use a mouse ileocecal resection (ICR) model to determine if tributyrin (TBT) supplementation could prevent the onset of microbial dysbiosis or alternatively enhance the recovery of the gut microbiota and reduce gastrointestinal inflammation. METHODS: Male wild-type (129 s1/SvlmJ) mice aged 8-15 weeks were separated into single cages and randomized 1:1:1:1 to each of the four experimental groups: control (CTR), preoperative TBT supplementation (PRE), postoperative TBT supplementation (POS), and combined pre- and postoperative supplementation (TOT). ICR was performed one week from baseline assessment with mice assessed at 1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks postoperatively. Primary outcomes included evaluating changes to gut microbial communities occurring from ICR to 4 weeks. RESULTS: A total of 34 mice that underwent ICR (CTR n = 9; PRE n = 10; POS n = 9; TOT n = 6) and reached the primary endpoint were included in the analysis. Postoperative TBT supplementation was associated with an increased recolonization and abundance of anaerobic taxa including Bacteroides thetaiotomicorn, Bacteroides caecimuris, Parabacteroides distasonis, and Clostridia. The microbial recolonization of PRE mice was characterized by a bloom of aerotolerant organisms including Staphylococcus, Lactobacillus, Enteroccaceae, and Peptostreptococcacea. PRE mice had a trend towards decreased ileal inflammation as evidenced by decreased levels of IL-1β (p = 0.09), IL-6 (p = 0.03), and TNF-α (p < 0.05) compared with mice receiving TBT postoperatively. In contrast, POS mice had trends towards reduced colonic inflammation demonstrated by decreased levels of IL-6 (p = 0.07) and TNF-α (p = 0.07). These changes occurred in the absence of changes to fecal short-chain fatty acid concentrations or histologic injury scoring. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of our work demonstrate that the timing of tributyrin supplementation differentially modulates gastrointestinal inflammation and gut microbial recolonization following murine ICR.

The gut and oral microbiome have independently been shown to be associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, it is not known to what extent gut and oral microbial disease markers converge in terms of their composition in IBD. Further, the spatial and temporal variation within the oral microenvironments of IBD remain to be elucidated. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We used a prospectively recruited cohort of patients with IBD (n = 47) and unrelated healthy control patients (n = 18) to examine the spatial and temporal distribution of microbiota within the various oral microenvironments, represented by saliva, tongue, buccal mucosa, and plaque, and compared them with stool. Microbiome characterization was performed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: The oral microbiome displayed IBD-associated dysbiosis, in a site- and taxa-specific manner. Plaque samples depicted a relatively severe degree of dysbiosis, and the disease-associated dysbiotic bacterial groups were predominantly the members of the phylum Firmicutes. Our 16S rRNA gene analyses show that oral microbiota can distinguish patients with IBD from healthy control patients, with salivary microbiota performing the best, closely matched by stool and other oral sites. Longitudinal profiles of microbial composition suggest that some taxa are more consistently perturbed than others, preferentially in a site-dependent fashion. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data indicate the potential of using oral microbial profiles in screening and monitoring patients with IBD. Furthermore, these results support the importance of spatial and longitudinal microbiome sampling to interpret disease-associated dysbiotic states and eventually to gain insights into disease pathogenesis.

100 subgingival plaque samples were collected from 50 subjects (16 MP, 17 SP and 17 PH), forming six groups: PHS (PH, shallow), MPS (MP, shallow), MPM (MP, moderate), SPS (SP, shallow), SPM (SP, moderate), and SPD (SP, deep). Samples were analyzed using high-throughput sequencing. RESULT: The subgingival microbiome showed significant differences associated with both PD and periodontitis stage (p < 0.05). With increasing PD, alpha diversity initially increased and then decreased. Pathogenic genera like Fusobacterium, Filifactor, and Porphyromonas increased, while health-associated genera like Streptococcus and Haemophilus decreased. At shallow sites, the PHS, MPS, and SPS groups showed similar community structure. At moderate and deep sites, the SPM and SPD groups exhibited significant differences in community structure compared to the MPM group, with the SPM and SPD groups showing decreased abundances of Actinomyces and increased abundances of Treponema. The microbial co-networks in the SPD and SPM groups exhibited greater complexity and connectivity and were more resilient to random microbial or node removal. CONCLUSIONS: The subgingival microbiome shows strong associations with PD and periodontitis stage. CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Once periodontitis progresses to stage III/IV, reconstructing a healthy subgingival microbiome may be challenging, emphasizing the importance of early prevention.

The gut microbiota (GM) plays a critical role in regulating human physiology, with dysbiosis linked to various diseases, including heart failure (HF). HF is a complex syndrome with a significant global health impact, as its incidence doubles with each decade of life, and its prevalence peaks in individuals over 80 years. A bidirectional interaction exists between GM and HF, where alterations in gut health can worsen the disease's progression. MAIN BODY: The "gut hypothesis of HF" suggests that HF-induced changes, such as reduced intestinal perfusion and altered gut motility, negatively impact GM composition, leading to increased intestinal permeability, the release of GM-derived metabolites into the bloodstream, and systemic inflammation. This process creates a vicious cycle that further deteriorates heart function. GM-derived metabolites, including trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), and secondary bile acids (BAs), can influence gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone modifications. These epigenetic changes may play a crucial role in mediating the effects of dysbiotic gut microbial metabolites, linking them to altered cardiac health and contributing to the progression of HF. This process is particularly relevant in older individuals, as the aging process itself has been associated with both dysbiosis and cumulative epigenetic alterations, intensifying the interplay between GM, epigenetic changes, and HF, and further increasing the risk of HF in the elderly. CONCLUSION: Despite the growing body of evidence, the complex interplay between GM, epigenetic modifications, and HF remains poorly understood. The dynamic nature of epigenetics and GM, shaped by various factors such as age, diet, and lifestyle, presents significant challenges in elucidating the precise mechanisms underlying this complex relationship. Future research should prioritize innovative approaches to overcome these limitations. By identifying specific metabolite-induced epigenetic modifications and modulating the composition and function of GM, novel and personalized therapeutic strategies for the prevention and/or treatment of HF can be developed. Moreover, targeted research focusing specifically on older individuals is crucial for understanding the intricate connections between GM, epigenetics, and HF during aging.

Over the past years, there has been a significant increase in the incidence of Mycoplasma pneumoniae (MP) infections, particularly among pediatric patients, nationwide. An emerging body of research has established a link between dysbiosis of the host microbiome and the metabolic functioning of the host, which contributes to the development of respiratory diseases. METHODS: A total of 25 children were included in the study, comprising 15 pneumonia patients and 10 healthy children. Stool samples were collected from all participants to analyze the 16S ribosomal RNA (16S rRNA) gene, while serum samples were prepared for untargeted metabolomics to qualitatively and quantitatively assess short-chain fatty acids. RESULTS: The gut microbial composition of individuals with Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia (MPP) exhibited significant differences compared to healthy children. Notably, diseased children demonstrated higher microbial diversity and an enrichment of opportunistic pathogens, such as Erysipelatoclostridium and Eggerthella. Analysis revealed elevated levels of two specific short-chain fatty acids, namely acetic acid and isobutyric acid, in the MPP group, suggesting their potential as biomarkers for predicting MP infection. Metabolomic signature analysis identified a significant increase in major classes of glycerophospholipids in the MPP group. Moreover, we identified a total of 750 significant correlations between gut microbiota and circulating serum metabolites. MPP enriched genera Erysipelatoclostridium and Eggerthella, exhibited negative associations with indole-3-butyric acid. Additionally, Eggerthella showed a positive correlation with inflammatory metabolites LPC (18:0). DISCUSSION: Collectively, these findings provide novel insights into the selection of potential biomarkers and the pathogenesis of MPP in children based on the gut microbiota and systemic circulating metabolites.

A mouse model of colitis was established using 3.0% dextran sulfate sodium (DSS). Following the induction of colitis, mice were treated via tail vein injection with either conventional PDLSC-derived EVs (P-EVs) or LPS-pretreated PDLSC-derived EVs (LPS pre-EVs). The EVs were characterized using transmission electron microscopy, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and Western blot analysis. The therapeutic effects and mechanisms were evaluated through a combination of small animal live imaging, disease activity index (DAI) scoring, histopathological staining, qRT-PCR, 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and mass spectrometry analysis. RESULTS: The LPS pre-EVs exhibited typical EVs characteristics in terms of morphology, particle size distribution, and marker protein expression. Compared to P-EVs, LPS pre-EVs significantly ameliorated weight loss, DAI scores, colon length, and perianal symptoms in DSS-induced murine colitis. Additionally, LPS pre-EVs up-regulated the expression of Arginase-1, a typical M2 macrophage marker, and tight junction proteins, including ZO-1, Occludin, and Claudin-1, enhanced gut microbial diversity, and significantly regulated intestinal protein expression and activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: LPS pre-EVs exhibit significant anti-inflammatory and tissue repair effects in a mouse model of colitis. The underlying mechanisms may involve the regulation of macrophage polarization, maintenance of intestinal barrier function, modulation of the gut microbiota, and activation of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway.

Fecal samples were collected from seven pediatric patients diagnosed with UC and seven age-matched healthy controls. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS) method was set up for quantifications of thirteen different FA-isoBAs, including three new FA-isoBAs which had never been characterized. Method validation tests were performed with optimization of sample preparation. Statistical analyses were conducted to compare FA-isoBA concentrations between UC patients and healthy controls. RESULTS: The LC/MS method had sufficient linearity (r > 0.998), with the low detection limit (0.03-2.82 nmol/g stool), and limits of quantification (0.10-9.40 nmol/g stool) for all FA-isoBAs. The total FA-isoBAs concentration in UC patients was significantly lower than healthy controls, regardless of the degree of the disease severity. The UC subjects had markedly increased primary bile acid (BA) levels with decreased secondary BAs. Propionic acid-linked isoBA and stearic acid-linked 12-oxo-isolithocholic acid were newly identified from healthy subjects but they were not present in UC subjects. In agreement with the previous report, composition of long-chain (C16-C18) FA-linked BAs dominated over short-chain FA-linked BAs both in healthy and disease subjects. CONCLUSION: The present study reported the fecal FA-isoBA profiles in pediatric UC patients for the first time. The results open the door to the new field that investigates the role of these microbial-driven BAs in gastrointestinal health.

Microscopic colitis (MC) is a common cause of chronic diarrhea, predominantly among older adults. Emerging evidence suggests that perturbations of gut microbiome and metabolome may play an important role in MC pathogenesis. OBJECTIVE: To comprehensively characterize alterations of the gut microbial and metabolic composition in MC. DESIGN: We established a longitudinal cohort of adult patients with MC and two control groups of individuals - chronic diarrhea controls and age- and sex-matched controls without diarrhea. Using stool samples, gut microbiome was analyzed by whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing, and gut metabolome was profiled by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Per-feature enrichment analyses of microbial species, metabolic pathways, and metabolites were done using multivariable linear models both cross-sectionally comparing MC to controls and longitudinally according to disease activity. Lastly, we performed multi-omics association analyses to assess the relationship between microbiome and metabolome data. RESULTS: We included 683 participants, 131 with active MC (66 with both active and remission samples), 159 with chronic diarrhea, and 393 age- and sex-matched controls without diarrhea. The stool microbiome in active MC was characterized by a lower alpha diversity as compared to controls and the remission phase of MC. Compared to controls, we identified eight enriched species in MC, most of which were pro-inflammatory oral-typical species, such as Veillonella dispar and Haemophilus parainfluenzae . In contrast, 11 species, including anti-inflammatory microbes such as Blautia glucerasea and Bacteroides stercoris, were depleted in MC. Similarly, pro-inflammatory metabolites, including lactosylceramides, ceramides, lysophospholipids, and lysoplasmalogens were enriched in active MC as compared to controls or MC cases in remission. Multi-omics association analyses revealed strong and concordant links between microbes, their metabolic pathways, and metabolomic profiles, supporting the tight interplay between disturbances in stool microbiome and metabolome in MC. CONCLUSION: We observed a significant shift in stool microbial and metabolomic composition in MC. Our findings could be used in the future for development of non-invasive biomarkers for diagnosing and monitoring MC and developing novel therapeutics. WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC: Microbiome dysbiosis has been proposed to contribute to microscopic colitis (MC) pathogenesis.However, previous studies have been limited by small sample sizes, reliance on 16S rRNA sequencing technique, potential confounding by stool consistency, and lack of functional analyses of microbiome and longitudinal data. Moreover, the metabolomic composition of MC remain largely unknown. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS: In this largest longitudinal MC cohort with two control groups - chronic diarrhea controls and controls without diarrhea, gut microbiome of MC is characterized by a lower alpha diversity, enriched pro-inflammatory oral-typical species and depleted anti-inflammatory beneficial species.Gut metabolome of MC shows significant enrichment of pro-inflammatory metabolites, including lactosylceramides, ceramides, lysophospholipids, and lysoplasmalogens. Multi-omics analyses demonstrate strong and concordant relationships between microbes, metabolic pathways, and metabolomic profiles. HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH PRACTICE OR POLICY: Our findings could facilitate development of non-invasive biomarkers and novel therapeutics for MC.

This review article is a valuable tutorial for clinicians, specifically introducing them to the concept of dysbiosis, with potential contributions to communication and swallowing deficits. Future research should delineate the role of specific pathogenic bacteria in disease pathogenesis to identify therapeutic targets.

Experimental kidney disease was created using adenine feeding and subtotal nephrectomy in rats, and by adenine feeding in mice. Loss of periodontal bone height was assessed using a dissecting microscope supported by micro-CT, light, confocal and electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. Salivary biochemistry was assessed using NMR spectroscopy. The oral microbiome was evaluated using culture-based and molecular methods, and the transmissibility of dysbiosis was assessed using co-caging and microbial transfer experiments into previously germ-free recipient mice. RESULTS: We demonstrate that experimental kidney disease causes a reproducible reduction of alveolar bone height, without gingival inflammation or overt hyperparathyroidism but with evidence of failure of bone formation at the periodontal crest. We show that kidney disease alters the biochemical composition of saliva and induces progressive dysbiosis of the oral microbiota, with microbial samples from animals with kidney disease displaying reduced overall bacterial growth, increased alpha diversity, reduced abundance of key components of the healthy oral microbiota such as Streptococcus and Rothia, and an increase in minor taxa including those from gram-negative phyla Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Co-housing diseased rats with healthy ones ameliorates the periodontal disease phenotype, whilst transfer of oral microbiota from mice with kidney disease causes periodontal disease in germ-free animals with normal kidney function. CONCLUSIONS: We advocate that periodontal disease should be regarded as a complication of kidney disease, initiated by oral dysbiosis through mechanisms independent of overt inflammation or hyperparathyroidism.

The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has emerged as a global health crisis, with clinical manifestations including those suggesting injury to various organs such as the ovaries, which implies that it extends beyond respiratory infections. Changes in gut microbiota may exhibit correlations with the mechanisms and stages of severity in COVID-19, as well as a link with sex hormones, embryo development, and pregnancy. Controlled ovarian stimulation (COS) is used to induce the development of multiple high-quality follicles during in vitro fertilization (IVF). Our research aimed to investigate whether patients infected with COVID-19 have altered gut microbiota compositions that would affect the outcomes of COS. METHODS: Twenty-one healthy females and seventeen patients with COVID-19 were enrolled. Samples were sequenced for gut microbiota identification through 16 S rRNA V3-V4 region, including species annotation, community diversity, and community functions. RESULTS: No significant differences were found between the groups in terms of in IVF cycle outcomes and laboratory parameters. Patients with COVID-19 and healthy women showed no significant difference in the total number of available blastocyst embryos. Furthermore, the gut microbiota alpha diversity index in the COVID-19 group were markedly reduced compared to those of healthy females. Comparing the COVID-19 group to the controls, the gut microbiota dysbiosis decreased levels of Ruminococcus, and Agathobater, and elevated levels of Achromobacter and Raistonia. Finally, we identified a series of microbial functional characteristics, including membrane transport and carbohydrate metabolism, that exhibited significant disparities between the two groups. CONCLUSIONS: Patients in the COVID-19 group exhibited significant disparities in the gut microbiota composition compared to the healthy women during COS. However, the IVF outcomes did not show any significant differences between the two groups. Collectively, our speculation suggests that SARS-COV-2 infection may alter the gut microbiota without impacting IVF outcomes.

We collected saliva samples from 9 non-obese and 13 obese participants and conducted 16S rRNA sequencing to analyze the differences in oral microbiota between obese and non-obese individuals in terms of microbial abundance, functionality, and interaction networks. RESULTS: Obese participants exhibited a distinct composition of salivary microbiota compared to non-obese participants, with a greater number of ASVs detected and higher α diversity indices. Specifically, Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter, and Actinobacillus were significantly enriched, while Actinomyces showed significant depletion. Functional prediction analysis indicated that biofilm formation pathways were significantly more abundant in the obese group. Random forest regression model analysis identified Bergeyella as the most contributive genus, and interaction network analysis suggested that Bergeyella may function as a bridge node, linking the obese group-enriched genera to the broader microbial community and facilitating the exchange of information and resources. DISCUSSION: Our study suggests that obesity may be closely associated with salivary microbiota dysbiosis and functional changes. Further research is needed to elucidate the causal relationship and underlying molecular mechanisms between obesity and oral microbiota dysbiosis, or to determine if they mutually influence each other.

Gut microbiome plays a significant role in longevity, and dysbiosis is indeed one of the hallmarks of aging. However, the causal relationship between gut microbiota and human longevity or aging remains elusive. METHODS: Our study assessed the causal relationships between gut microbiome and longevity using Mendelian Randomization (MR). Summary statistics for the gut microbiome were obtained from four genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis of the MiBioGen consortium (N = 18,340), Dutch Microbiome Project (N = 7738), German individuals (N = 8956), and Finland individuals (N = 5959). Summary statistics for Longevity were obtained from Five GWAS meta-analysis, including Human healthspan (N = 300,447), Longevity (N = 36,745), Lifespans (N = 1,012,240), Parental longevity (N = 389,166), and Frailty (one of the primary aging-linked physiological hallmarks, N = 175,226). RESULTS: Our findings reveal several noteworthy associations, including a negative correlation between Bacteroides massiliensis and longevity, whereas the genus Subdoligranulum and Alistipes, as well as species Alistipes senegalensis and Alistipes shahii, exhibited positive associations with specific longevity traits. Moreover, the microbial pathway of coenzyme A biosynthesis I, pyruvate fermentation to acetate and lactate II, and pentose phosphate pathway exhibited positive associations with two or more traits linked to longevity. Conversely, the TCA cycle VIII (helicobacter) pathway consistently demonstrated a negative correlation with lifespan and parental longevity. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings of this MR study indicated many significant associations between gut microbiome and longevity. These microbial taxa and pathways may potentially play a protective role in promoting longevity or have a suppressive effect on lifespan.

Fourteen CD patients participated in a 12-week PBD intervention. Dietary adherence was monitored through self-reported food diaries and trnL sequencing, which detects plant residues in fecal samples. Gut microbiota was analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing, and fecal calprotectin levels were measured as an indicator of intestinal inflammation. RESULTS: TrnL sequencing identified 55 plant genera in fecal samples, compared to 41 reported in food diaries, highlighting its accuracy in assessing plant residue diversity. By week 4, participants demonstrated a 1.4-fold increase in plant intake, correlating with a significant increase in microbial diversity. Key genera associated with gut health, such as Faecalibacterium and Bacteroides, increased in abundance. Additionally, fecal calprotectin levels decreased from 472 mg/kg at baseline to 207 mg/kg at week 12, indicating reduced intestinal inflammation. DISCUSSION: A PBD positively influenced gut microbiota composition and decreased intestinal inflammation in CD patients. The study also demonstrated that trnL sequencing is an effective tool for assessing dietary adherence in clinical settings, offering a more objective measure than self-reported food diaries.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis and related immune dysfunction have been associated with the pathogenesis of Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection in infants with neonatal cholestasis (NC) as previously reported by us. However, the interaction of a perturbed microbiome, HCMV infection, and dysregulated immunity leading to exacerbation of disease severity has not been investigated so far. In this study, we examined the association of gut microbiome, host inflammatory and homeostatic markers that are likely to govern increased pathogenesis of NC in HCMV infected IgM positive infants (N = 15) compared to IgM negative (N = 15) individuals. Stool samples of HCMV infected infants and age-matched healthy controls (N = 10) were assessed for gut bacteria-derived metabolites like short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), cytokines and markers of gut barrier integrity. Data were correlated with previously determined gut microbiome composition and frequency of immune cell subsets. Finally, validation of clinical potential was undertaken by principal component analysis (PCA) of integrated data to delineate the spectrum of clinical pathology. RESULTS: Significantly lower levels of SCFAs and elevated fecal levels of soluble inflammatory mediators were observed in IgM positive HCMV infected infants. Further, increased plasma LPS levels and markers of gut permeability, suggestive of microbial translocation due to a 'leaky gut' were observed in HCMV infected IgM positive group. PCA of integrated data revealed clearly disparate profiles representative of IgM positive, IgM negative, and uninfected healthy states. CONCLUSION: Our results suggest the utility of an integrated approach involving dysregulated microbiome-immune axis for gaining a better understanding of pathogenesis associated with HCMV infection in NC.

Pediatric cow milk allergies (CMA) can occur in immunoglobulin (Ig) E and non-IgE-mediated forms. Unlike IgE-mediated allergies, the mechanisms of disease pathogenesis in non-IgE-mediated food allergy and an association with microbiome has not been well established. Previous studies have identified the presence of altered humoral responses to gut bacteria in IgE mediated allergies. Here, we analyzed IgA, IgE and IgG responses to gut bacteria in subjects with either IgE or non-IgE mediated CMA to identify relative proportions of Ig-coated bacteria and characterize unique disease specific microbial signatures. METHODS: Multi-parametric flow cytometry analysis was used to identify IgA, IgE and IgG responses to gut bacteria in CMA patients. Cell sorting of Ig coated gut bacteria was subsequently performed followed by high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing and specific patterns of humoral responses to gut bacteria assessed in each study group. RESULTS: We identified significant alterations in IgA and IgG gut bacterial coating patterns in CMA subjects. Proportions of IgA-coated bacteria were decreased in IgE mediated CMA subjects without atopic dermatitis (ALL) and non-IgE mediated CMA subjects (ENP), compared to healthy controls (CON). In comparison, IgG-coated bacteria was significantly elevated in CMA subjects with atopic dermatitis (AD). Alpha and beta diversities displayed significant differences in IgA-, IgE-, and IgG-coated bacteria in AD and ENP groups. Significant differences in bacteria coated by IgA, IgE and IgG were detected at Phyla, Genus and Species levels and associated bacterial dysbiosis in IgE and non-IgE mediated allergies were identified. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) effect size (LEFse) revealed unique disease associated bacterial signatures, including several pathogenic bacteria namely Bacteroides fragilis, Ruminococcus gnavus, Eubacterium dolichum, Fusobacterium, Clostridium neonatale and Robinsoniella peoriensis. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis confirmed the efficiency of using the bacterial signatures identified as biomarkers for disease. CONCLUSIONS: Altered IgA and IgG responses to gut bacteria were identified in CMA subjects. The disease-specific responses were associated with alterations in bacterial diversity and concomitant dysbiosis of Ig-coated bacteria in IgE-mediated and non-IgE-mediated CMA pediatric subjects. The identification of pathogenic bacteria uniquely associated with different classes of allergic disease indicates a role of these bacteria in driving disease-specific pathological phenotypes.

In this study, we analyzed the multi-kingdom gut microbiome (i.e., bacteriome, mycobiome, and virome) of 25 CHB-LF patients and 28 healthy individuals through whole-metagenome shotgun sequencing of their stool samples. RESULTS: We found that the gut bacteriome, mycobiome, and virome of CHB-LF patients were fundamentally altered, characterized by a panel of 110 differentially abundant bacterial species, 16 differential fungal species, and 90 differential viruses. The representative CHB-LF-enriched bacteria included members of Blautia_A (e.g., B. wexlerae, B. massiliensis, and B. obeum), Dorea (e.g., D. longicatena and D. formicigenerans), Streptococcus, Erysipelatoclostridium, while some species of Bacteroides (e.g., B. finegoldii and B. thetaiotaomicron), Faecalibacterium (mainly F. prausnitzii), and Bacteroides_A (e.g., B. plebeius_A and B. coprophilus) were depleted in patients. Fungi such as Malassezia spp. (e.g., M. japonica and M. sympodialis), Candida spp. (e.g., C. parapsilosis), and Mucor circinelloides were more abundant in CHB-LF patients, while Mucor irregularis, Phialophora verrucosa, Hortaea werneckii, and Aspergillus fumigatus were decreases. The CHB-LF-enriched viruses contained 18 Siphoviridae, 12 Myoviridae, and 1 Podoviridae viruses, while the control-enriched viruses included 16 Siphoviridae, 9 Myoviridae, 2 Quimbyviridae, and 1 Podoviridae_crAss-like members. Moreover, we revealed that the CHB-LF-associated gut multi-kingdom signatures were tightly interconnected, suggesting that they may act together on the disease. Finally, we showed that the microbial signatures were effective in discriminating the patients from healthy controls, suggesting the potential of gut microbiota in the prediction of CHB-LF and related diseases. DISCUSSION: In conclusion, our findings delineated the fecal bacteriome, mycobiome, and virome landscapes of the CHB-LF microbiota and provided biomarkers that will aid in future mechanistic and clinical intervention studies.

Food allergies, particularly peanut (PN) allergies, are a growing concern, with fatal anaphylaxis incidents often reported. While palforzia is the sole FDA-approved drug for managing PN allergies, it is not universally effective. PURPOSE: This study aimed to investigate the potential of Gynostemma pentaphyllum saponins (GpS) as a novel therapeutic agent for PN allergy through modulation of gut microbiota, addressing the limitations of current treatments. METHODS: To elucidate the role of GpS on peanut allergy, we first built a PN-sensitized C57BL/6J model mice. Through comprehensive sequencing analysis, we identified Parabacteroides distasonis as a key bacterium triggering PN sensitization. Employing the same mouse model, GpS was evaluated for its effects on anaphylactic symptoms, serum immunoglobulin levels, and allergy-related biomarkers. 16S rRNA sequencing and transcriptomic analysis were applied to investigate the impact of GpS on the host's gut epithelium and microbiome. RESULTS: GpS treatment effectively reduced anaphylactic symptoms in PN-sensitized mice, as shown by decreased IgG1, total IgE, and PN-specific IgE levels. It also modulated the immune response by suppressing proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IFN-γ, IL-21) and chemokines (CCL5, CCL12, CCL17, CCL22), while enhancing anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13). Fecal microbial transplant from GpS-treated Model mice to PN-sensitized mice displayed anti-peanut allergy effects. Additionally, the administration of GpS-enhanced bacteria (Clostridium aldenese or Lactobacillus murinus), alleviated anaphylactic symptoms and reduced serum allergy markers in PN-sensitized mice. CONCLUSION: To conclude, we revealed the intestinal environment, signaling molecules, mucosal cytokines, and commensal microbial profiles in the peanut-sensitized mouse model. We further presented evidence for the protective effect of GpS against PN allergen sensitization by downregulating a series of food-allergy-associated biomarkers and cytokines via the modulation of gut bacteria. More importantly, supported by both in vitro and in vivo experiments, we demonstrated that the protective effect of GpS against PN-allergy is through the enhancement of two commensal bacteria, Clostridium aldenese, and Lactobacillus murinus.

Understanding the causes of hypertension is important in order to prevent the disease. Gut microbiota (GM) seems to play an important role, but the detailed physiology remains elusive, with alpha diversity being the most studied indicator. OBJECTIVES: This review aimed to systematically synthesize data on gut microbiota (alpha diversity) and hypertension. METHODS: Databases, including MEDLINE/PubMed, Scopus, and EMBASE, and citations were systematically queried. We retrieved articles reporting the association between gut microbiota and hypertension. A valid critical appraisal tool was also used to investigate the quality of the included studies. RESULTS: Eighteen eligible studies met our inclusion criteria. In this report, we focused on the following indices of alpha diversity: Shannon, Chao1, Simpson, and Abundance-based Coverage Estimator (ACE) indices. Several studies observed a significantly lower Shannon index in hypertensive patients compared to the healthy control group. Nevertheless, no statistically significant difference was found for the Chao1, Simpson, and ACE indices between hypertensive patients and controls. A higher Firmicutes-to-Bacteroidetes ratio (F/B ratio) was consistently observed in hypertensive patients compared to healthy controls, indicating potential dysbiosis in the gut microbiota. CONCLUSIONS: Our systematic review indicates that hypertensive patients may exhibit an imbalance in gut microbiota, evidenced by decreased alpha diversity and an elevated F/B ratio. However, the absence of statistically significant differences in secondary diversity indices (Chao1, Simpson, and ACE) highlights the need for further research. Well-designed, large-scale studies are necessary to clarify these associations and explore the role of gut microbiota in hypertension development.

Disease-associated gut microbial modules were identified using statistical machine learning and co-abundance network analysis in controls, CD and ITB patients recruited as part of this study. Module reproducibility was reinvestigated through meta-network analysis encompassing >5400 bacteriomes and ~900 mycobiomes. Subsequently, >1600 Indian gut microbiomes were analyzed to identify a central-core gut microbiome of 46 taxa, whose abundances aided in the formulation of an India-specific Core Gut Microbiome Score (CGMS) to measure the degree of core retention. RESULTS: Both diseases witness similar patterns of alterations in [alpha]-diversity, characterized by a significant reduction in gut bacterial (i.e., bacterial/archaeal) diversity and a concomitant increase in the fungal [alpha]-diversity. Specific bacterial taxa, along with the diverging mycobiome enabled distinction between the diseases. Co-abundance network analysis of these taxa, validated by integrated meta-network analysis, revealed a 'disease-depleted' module, consistent across multiple cohorts, with >75% of this module constituting the central-core Indian gut microbiome. CGMS robustly assessed the core-microbiome loss across different stages of gut inflammatory disorders, in Indian and international cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: While the disease-specific gain of detrimental bacteria forms an important component of gut dysbiosis, loss of the core microbiome is a shared phenomenon contributing to various GI disorders.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is linked to host gut dysbiosis. Here we performed faecal gut microbiome sequencing to investigate SLE-pathogenic gut microbes and their potential mechanisms. METHODS: There were 134 healthy controls (HCs) and 114 SLE cases for 16 S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing and 97 HCs and 124 SLE cases for shotgun metagenomics. Faecal microbial changes and associations with clinical phenotypes were evaluated, and SLE-associated microbial genera were identified in amplicon analysis. Next, metagenomic sequencing was applied for accurate identification of microbial species and discovery of their metabolic pathways and immunogenic peptides both relevant to SLE. Finally, contribution of specific taxa to disease development was confirmed by oral gavage into lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice. RESULTS: SLE patients had gut microbiota richness reduction and composition alteration, particularly lupus nephritis and active patients. Proteobacteria/Bacteroidetes (P/B) ratio was remarkably up-regulated, and Escherichia was identified as the dominantly expanded genus in SLE, followed by metagenomics accurately located Escherichia coli and Escherichia unclassified species. Significant associations primarily appeared among Escherichia coli, metabolic pathways of purine nucleotide salvage or peptidoglycan maturation and SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI), and between multiple epitopes from Escherichia coli and disease activity or renal involvement phenotype. Finally, gavage with faecal Escherichia revealed that it upregulated lupus-associated serum traits and aggravated glomerular lesions in MRL/lpr mice. CONCLUSION: We characterize a novel SLE exacerbating Escherichia outgrowth and suggest its contribution to SLE procession may be partially associated with metabolite changes and cross-reactivity of gut microbiota-associated epitopes and host autoantigens. The findings could provide a deeper insight into gut Escherichia in the procession of SLE.

The complexity of contexts and varied purposes for which biome donation are requested are unknown in South Africa. OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to provide strategic data towards actualisation of whether a stool donor bank may be established as a collaborative between Western Cape Blood Services (WCBS) and the University of Cape Town (UCT). METHOD: We designed a cross-sectional, questionnaire-based survey to determine willingness of WCBS blood donors to donate stool specimens for microbiome biobanking. The study was conducted between 01 June 2022 and 01 July 2022 at three WCBS donation centres in Cape Town, South Africa. Anonymous blood donors who met the inclusion criteria were enrolled. Anonymised demographic and interview data were analysed statistically. RESULTS: Analysis of responses from 209/231 blood donors demonstrated in a logistic regression model that compensation (p < 0.001) and 'societal benefit outweighs inconvenience' beliefs (p = 7.751e-05) were covariates significantly associated with willingness to donate stool. Age was borderline significant at a 5% level (p = 0.0556). Most willing stool donors indicated that donating stool samples would not affect blood donations (140/157, 90%). Factors decreasing willingness to donate were stool collection being unpleasant or embarrassing. CONCLUSION: The survey provides strategic data for the establishment of a stool bank and provided an understanding of the underlying determinants regarding becoming potential donors. CONTRIBUTION: This is the first report on the perspectives of potential participants in donating samples towards a stool microbiome biobank in South Africa, a necessity for faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT).

Prior efforts have revealed changes in gut microbiome, circulating metabolome, and multimodal neuroimaging features in cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD). However, there is a paucity of research integrating the multi-omic information to characterize the role of the microbiota-gut-brain axis in CSVD. METHODS: We collected gut microbiome, fecal and blood metabolome, multimodal magnetic resonance imaging data from 37 CSVD patients with white matter hyperintensities and 46 healthy controls. Between-group comparison was performed to identify the differential gut microbial taxa, followed by performance of multi-stage microbiome-metabolome-neuroimaging-neuropsychology correlation analyses in CSVD patients. RESULTS: Our data showed both depleted and enriched gut microbes in CSVD patients. Among the differential microbes, Haemophilus and Akkermansia were associated with a range of metabolites enriched for Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis pathway. Furthermore, the affected metabolites were associated with neuroimaging measures involving gray matter morphology, spontaneous intrinsic brain activity, white matter integrity, and global structural network topology, which were in turn related to cognition and emotion in CSVD patients. CONCLUSION: Our findings provide an integrative framework to understand the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the interplay between gut microbiota dysbiosis and CSVD, highlighting the potential of targeting the microbiota-gut-brain axis as a therapeutic strategy in CSVD patients.

Age-related neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) pose a formidable challenge to healthcare systems worldwide due to their complex pathogenesis, significant morbidity, and mortality. Scope and Approach: This comprehensive review aims to elucidate the central role of the microbiotagut- brain axis (MGBA) in ND pathogenesis. Specifically, it delves into the perturbations within the gut microbiota and its metabolomic landscape, as well as the structural and functional transformations of the gastrointestinal and blood-brain barrier interfaces in ND patients. Additionally, it provides a comprehensive overview of the recent advancements in medicinal and dietary interventions tailored to modulate the MGBA for ND therapy. CONCLUSION: Accumulating evidence underscores the pivotal role of the gut microbiota in ND pathogenesis through the MGBA. Dysbiosis of the gut microbiota and associated metabolites instigate structural modifications and augmented permeability of both the gastrointestinal barrier and the blood-brain barrier (BBB). These alterations facilitate the transit of microbial molecules from the gut to the brain via neural, endocrine, and immune pathways, potentially contributing to the etiology of NDs. Numerous investigational strategies, encompassing prebiotic and probiotic interventions, pharmaceutical trials, and dietary adaptations, are actively explored to harness the microbiota for ND treatment. This work endeavors to enhance our comprehension of the intricate mechanisms underpinning ND pathogenesis, offering valuable insights for the development of innovative therapeutic modalities targeting these debilitating disorders.

Microbial-derived secondary bile acids (SBAs) are reabsorbed and sensed via host receptors modulating cellular inflammation and fibrosis. Feline chronic kidney disease (CKD) occurs with progressive renal inflammation and fibrosis, mirroring the disease pathophysiology of human CKD patients. METHODS: Prospective cross-sectional study compared healthy cats (n = 6) with CKD (IRIS Stage 2 n = 17, Stage 3 or 4 n = 11). Single timepoint fecal samples from all cats underwent targeted bile acid metabolomics. 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing using DADA2 with SILVA taxonomy characterized the fecal microbiota. RESULTS: CKD cats had significantly reduced fecal concentrations (median 12.8 ng/mg, Mann-Whitney p = 0.0127) of the SBA ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) compared to healthy cats (median 39.4 ng/mg). Bile acid dysmetabolism characterized by <50% SBAs was present in 8/28 CKD and 0/6 healthy cats. Beta diversity significantly differed between cats with <50% SBAs and > 50% SBAs (PERMANOVA p < 0.0001). Twenty-six amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) with >97% nucleotide identity to Peptacetobacter hiranonis were identified. P. hiranonis combined relative abundance was significantly reduced (median 2.1%) in CKD cats with <50% SBAs compared to CKD cats with >50% SBAs (median 13.9%, adjusted p = 0.0002) and healthy cats with >50% SBAs (median 15.5%, adjusted p = 0.0112). P. hiranonis combined relative abundance was significantly positively correlated with the SBAs deoxycholic acid (Spearman r = 0.5218, adjusted p = 0.0407) and lithocholic acid (Spearman r = 0.5615, adjusted p = 0.0156). Three Oscillospirales ASVs and a Roseburia ASV were also identified as significantly correlated with fecal SBAs. CLINICAL AND TRANSLATIONAL IMPORTANCE: The gut-kidney axis mediated through microbial-derived SBAs appears relevant to the spontaneous animal CKD model of domestic cats. This includes reduced fecal concentrations of the microbial-derived SBA UDCA, known to regulate inflammation and fibrosis and be reno-protective. Microbes correlated with fecal SBAs include bai operon containing P. hiranonis, as well as members of Oscillospirales, which also harbor a functional bai operon. Ultimately, CKD cats represent a translational opportunity to study the role of SBAs in the gut-kidney axis, including the potential to identify novel microbial-directed therapeutics to mitigate CKD pathogenesis in veterinary patients and humans alike.

The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral reservoir remain poorly understood. RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research field. CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an effective cure for HIV.

The gut microbiota may be involved in neuropathic pain. However, the causal association between gut microbiota and neuropathic pain remains unclear. Whether immune cells and inflammatory factors mediate the pathway from gut microbiota to neuropathic pain has not been elucidated. METHODS: We obtained the summary data of 412 gut microbiota, 731 immune cells, 91 inflammatory factors, and five types of neuropathic pain (drug-induced neuropathy, postherpetic neuralgia, sciatica, trigeminal neuralgia, and unspecified neuralgia) from large-scale genome-wide association study (GWAS) datasets and the FinnGen database. We used bidirectional Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to explore the causal association between gut microbiota and neuropathic pain. Additionally, we conducted a mediation analysis to identify whether immune cells and inflammatory factors act as mediators within these causal relationships. RESULTS: Our study revealed 30 causal relationships between 26 gut bacterial taxa and five types of neuropathic pain, including four associated with drug-induced neuropathy, six with postherpetic neuralgia, five with sciatica, eight with trigeminal neuralgia, and seven with unspecified neuralgia. Moreover, we identified 35 gut bacterial pathway abundances causally involved in neuropathic pain. The reverse MR analysis showed no evidence of reverse causality from gut microbiota to neuropathic pain. Mediation analysis demonstrated that the immune cell phenotype "HLA-DR++ monocyte % leukocyte" mediated the causal relationship between p_Proteobacteria and sciatica with a mediation proportion of 36.15% (P = 0.038), whereas "CD11c on CD62L+ myeloid dendritic cell" mediated the causal pathway from assimilatory sulfate reduction to trigeminal neuralgia with a mediation proportion of 27.90% (P = 0.041). CONCLUSION: This study identified the causal relationships between several specific gut microbiota and various neuropathic pain subtypes. Additionally, two immune cells may act as potential mediators in the pathways from gut microbiota to neuropathic pain.

The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented. METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were performed. RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data. CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Vitiligo is an autoimmune disease characterized by loss of pigmentation in the skin. It affects 0.4 to 2% of the global population, but the factors that trigger autoimmunity remain elusive. Previous work on several immune-mediated dermatological disorders has illuminated the substantial roles of the gut microbiome in disease pathogenesis. Here, we examined the gut microbiome composition in a cohort of vitiligo patients and healthy controls from India, including patients with a family history of the disease. RESULTS: Our results show significant alterations in the gut microbiome of vitiligo patients compared to healthy controls, affecting taxonomic and functional profiles as well as community structure. We observed a reduction in the abundance of several bacterial taxa commonly associated with a healthy gut microbiome and noted a decrease in the abundance of SCFA (Short Chain Fatty Acids) producing taxa in the vitiligo group. Observation of a higher abundance of genes linked to bacteria-mediated degradation of intestinal mucus suggested a potential compromise of the gut mucus barrier in vitiligo. Functional analysis also revealed a higher abundance of fatty acid and lipid metabolism-related genes in the vitiligo group. Combined analysis with data from a French cohort of vitiligo also led to the identification of common genera differentiating healthy and gut microbiome across populations. CONCLUSION: Our observations, together with available data, strengthen the role of gut microbiome dysbiosis in symptom exacerbation and possibly pathogenesis in vitiligo. The reported microbiome changes also showed similarities with other autoimmune disorders, suggesting common gut microbiome-mediated mechanisms in autoimmune diseases. Further investigation can lead to the exploration of dietary interventions and probiotics for the management of these conditions.

This systematic review used PRISMA guidelines to identify peer-reviewed articles on schistosomiasis and its interactions with the host microbiome, using multiple databases and Google Scholar, providing a robust dataset for analysis. The study utilized Meta-Mar v3.5.1; descriptive tests, random-effects models, and subgroups were analyzed for the interaction between Schistosomiasis and the microbiome. Forest plots, Cochran's Q test, and Higgins' inconsistency statistic (I2) were used to assess heterogeneity. RESULTS: The human Schistosoma species were observed to be associated with various bacterial species isolated from blood, stool, urine, sputum, skin, and vaginal or cervical samples. A meta-analysis of the interaction between schistosomiasis and the host microbiome, based on 31 studies, showed 29,784 observations and 5871 events. The pooled estimates indicated a significant association between schistosomiasis and changes in the microbiome of infected individuals. There was considerable heterogeneity with variance effect sizes (p < 0.0001). Subgroup analysis of Schistosoma species demonstrated that S. haematobium was the most significant contributor to the overall heterogeneity, accounting for 62.1% (p < 0.01). S. mansoni contributed 13.0% (p = 0.02), and the coinfection of S. haematobium and S. mansoni accounted for 16.8% of the heterogeneity (p < 0.01), contributing to the variability seen in the pooled analysis. Similarly, praziquantel treatment (RR = 1.68, 95% CI: 1.07-2.64) showed high heterogeneity (Chi2 = 71.42, df = 11, p < 0.01) and also indicated that Schistosoma infections in males (RR = 1.46, 95% CI: 0.00 to 551.30) and females (RR = 2.09, 95% CI: 0.24 to 18.31) have a higher risk of altering the host microbiome. CONCLUSIONS: Schistosomiasis significantly disrupts the host microbiota across various bodily sites, leading to increased susceptibility to different bacterial taxa such as E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Mycobacterium species (M. tuberculosis and M. leprae). This disruption enables these bacteria to produce toxic metabolites, which in turn cause inflammation and facilitate the progression of disease. The impact of schistosomiasis on the vaginal microbiome underscores the necessity for gender-specific approaches to treatment and prevention. Effective management of female genital schistosomiasis (FGS) requires addressing both the parasitic infection and the resulting microbiome imbalances. Additionally, praziquantel-treated individuals have different microbiome compositions compared to individuals with no praziquantel treatment. This suggests that combining praziquantel treatment with probiotics could potentially decrease the disease severity caused by an altered microbiome.

We conducted a cross-sectional study with 24 participants, including patients with AA of varying severities and healthy controls. Scalp microbial communities were analyzed using swab samples and ion torrent sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene across multiple hypervariable regions. We explored correlations among bacterial abundance, microbiome metabolic pathways, and circulating inflammatory markers. RESULTS: Our findings reveal significant dysbiosis in the scalp microbiota of patients with AA compared to healthy controls. Severe AA cases had an increased presence of pro-inflammatory microbial taxa like Proteobacteria, whereas milder cases had higher levels of anti-inflammatory Actinobacteria. Notable species differences included abundant gram-negative bacteria such as Alistipes inops and Bacteroides pleibeius in severe AA, contrasted with Blautia faecis and Pyramydobacter piscolens predominantly in controls. Significantly, microbial imbalance correlated with AA severity (SALT scores) and systemic inflammatory markers, with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines linked to more severe disease. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that scalp microbiota may play a role in AA-related inflammation, although it is unclear whether the shifts are a cause or consequence of hair loss. Further research is needed to clarify the causal relationship and mechanisms involved.

A two-sample MR analysis was conducted using genome-wide association study (GWAS) data specific to OM and epilepsy in East Asian individuals. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) independent of confounders served as instrumental variables (IVs) to deduce causality. MR methodologies, including inverse variance weighted (IVW), MR-Egger, weighted median, and weighed mode methods, were utilized. Sensitivity analysis, including Cochrane's Q test, MR-Egger intercept test, and leave-one-out analysis, was applied to confirm the robustness of results. RESULTS: Among the 3117 bacterial taxa examined, we observed that 14 OM, like s_Streptococcus_mitis, s_Streptococcus_pneumoniae, and s_Haemophilus, were positively associated with epilepsy, while 7 OM, like g_Fusobacterium and g_Aggregatibacter, were negatively related to epilepsy. The MR-Egger intercept suggested that no evidence of horizontal pleiotropy was observed (p > 0.05). The leave-one-out analysis validated the robustness of the results. SIGNIFICANCE: This study underscores the effect of OM on epilepsy, suggesting potential mechanisms between the OM and epilepsy. Further investigation into the potential role of the OM is needed to enhance our in-depth understanding of the pathogenesis of epilepsy. PLAIN LANGUAGE SUMMARY: Previous research has demonstrated that the microbiota may influence the onset of epileptic seizures. We applied 3117 oral microbiota from the newest publicly available database of East Asian populations. Mendelian randomization analysis was utilized to estimate the causal relationship between oral microbiota and epilepsy. Our results showed that a causal effect exists between 21 oral microbiota and epilepsy. We provided genetic evidence for risk assessment and early intervention in epilepsy.

Celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder triggered by dietary gluten in genetically predisposed individuals that primarily affects the small intestine. Studies have reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa in the gut microbiota of celiac patients compared with non-celiac controls. However, findings across studies have inconsistencies and no microbial signature of celiac disease has been defined so far. RESULTS: Here, we showed, by comparing celiac patients with their non-celiac 1st-degree relatives, that bacterial communities of related individuals have similar species occurrence and abundance compared with non-relatives, regardless the disease status. We also found in celiac patients a loss of bacterial species associated with fiber degradation, and host metabolic and immune modulation, as ruminiclostridia, ruminococci, Prevotella, and Akkermansia muciniphila species. We demonstrated that the differential abundance of bacterial species correlates to different dietary patterns observed between the two groups. For instance, Ruminiclostridium siraeum, Ruminococcus bicirculans, and Bacteroides plebeious, recognized as fiber-degraders, appear more abundant in non-celiac 1st-degree relatives, which have a vegetable consumption pattern higher than celiac patients. Pattern of servings per day also suggests a possible link between these species' abundance and daily calorie intake. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we evidenced that a kinship approach could be valuable in unveiling potential celiac disease microbial traits, as well as the significance of dietary factors in shaping microbial profiles and their influence on disease development and progression. Our results pave the way for designing and adopting novel dietary strategies based on gluten-free fiber-enriched ingredients to improve disease management and patients' quality of life.

Recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is a critical clinical issue due to the increase in incidence and difficulty in treatment. We aimed to identify gut microbial and metabolic features associated with disease recurrence in a group of pediatric CDI patients. METHODS: A total of 84 children with primary CDI were prospectively enrolled in the study. Fecal samples collected at the initial diagnosis were subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing and targeted metabolomics analysis to profile the bacterial composition and metabolome. RESULTS: Twenty-six of 84 (31.0%) pediatric CDI patients experienced recurrence. The alpha diversity of the fecal microbiota was significantly lower in the recurrent group than in the nonrecurrent group, and the beta diversity was different from that of the nonrecurrent group. Taxonomic proﬁles revealed that the relative abundances of multiple bacterial taxa significantly differed between the recurrent and nonrecurrent groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size analysis identified several bacterial genera that discriminated between recurrent and nonrecurrent groups, including Parabacteroides, Coprococcus, Dialister, and Clostridium. Recurrent bacteria presented lower abundances of several short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria (Faecalibacterium, Butyricicoccus, Clostridium, Roseburia, and Ruminococcus), which were correlated with reduced fecal SCFA levels. In addition, several bile acids, including lithocholic acid (LCA), 12-ketoLCA, trihydroxycholestanoic acid, and deoxycholic acid, were decreased in recurrent patients. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the differing gut microbiota profiles in pediatric CDI patients may contribute to disease recurrence by modulating SCFA concentrations and bile acid profiles. The gut microbiota and metabolite signatures may be used to predict disease recurrence in children with CDI.

The association of the oral microbiome with SARS-CoV-2 infections and disease progression has been documented in European, Asian, and American populations but not in Africa. METHODS: We conducted a study in Ghana to evaluate and compare the naso-oropharyngeal microbiome in SARS-CoV-2-infected and uninfected persons before (pre-vaccine) and after vaccine availability (post-vaccine) in the country. 16S rRNA V3-V4 variable region was sequenced and analysed from DNA extracted from naso-oropharyngeal swabs. RESULTS: Considering only the infection status, infected and uninfected groups had no difference in their within-group diversity and was evident in the study population pre- and post-vaccine availability. The introduction of vaccines reduced the diversity of the naso-oropharyngeal microbiome particularly among SARS-CoV-2 positive persons and, vaccinated individuals (both infected and uninfected) had higher microbial diversity compared to their unvaccinated counterparts. SARS-CoV-2-positive and -negative individuals were largely compositionally similar varying by 4-7% but considering vaccination*infection statuses, the genetic distance increased to 12% (P = 0.003) and was mainly influenced by vaccination. Common among the pre- and post-vaccine samples, Atopobium and Finegoldia were abundant in infected and uninfected individuals, respectively. Bacteria belonging to major butyrate-producing phyla, Bacillota (particularly class Clostridia) and Bacteroidota showed increased abundance more strikingly in infected individuals before vaccines were available. They reduced significantly after vaccines were introduced into the country with Fusobacterium and Lachnoanaerobaculum being the only common bacteria between pre-vaccine infected persons and vaccinated individuals, suggesting that natural infection and vaccination correlate with high abundance of short-chain fatty acids. CONCLUSION: Our results show, in an African cohort, the abundance of bacteria taxa known for their protective pathophysiological processes, especially during infection, suggesting that this population is protected against severe COVID-19. The immune-related roles of the members of Bacillota and Bacteroidota that were found associated with infection and vaccination require further studies, and how these may be linked to ethnicity, diet and age. We also recommend expansion of microbiome-disease association studies across Africa to identify possible bacterial-mediated therapeutics for emerging infections.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease with unclear etiology. Growing evidence suggests the microbiome plays a role in SLE pathogenesis. However, findings are inconsistent across studies due to factors like small sample sizes and geographical variations. A comprehensive meta-analysis is needed to elucidate microbiome alterations in SLE. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to provide a systematic overview of microbiota dysbiosis across body sites in SLE through a meta-analysis of alpha diversity indices, beta diversity indices, and abundance taxa of microbiome. METHODS: A literature search was conducted across four databases to identify relevant studies comparing SLE patients and healthy controls. Extracted data encompassed alpha and beta diversity metrics, as well as bacterial, fungal, and viral abundance across gut, oral, skin, and other microbiota. Study quality was assessed using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale. Standardized mean differences and pooled effect sizes were calculated through meta-analytical methods. RESULTS: The analysis showed reduced alpha diversity and distinct beta diversity in SLE, particularly in the gut microbiota. Taxonomic analysis revealed compositional variations in bacteria from the gut and oral cavity. However, results for fungi, viruses, and bacteria from other sites were inconsistent due to limited studies. CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis offers a comprehensive perspective on microbiome dysbiosis in SLE patients across diverse body sites and taxa. The observed variations underscore the microbiome's potential role in SLE pathogenesis. Future research should address geographical variations, employ longitudinal designs, and integrate multi-omics approaches.

Few investigations have assessed contributions of both vaginal bacteria and proinflammatory immune mediators to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) acquisition risk in a prospective cohort. METHODS: We conducted a nested case-control study of African women who participated in a randomized placebo-controlled trial of daily oral versus vaginal tenofovir-based preexposure prophylaxis for HIV infection. Vaginal concentrations of 23 bacterial taxa and 16 immune mediators were measured. Relationships between individual bacterial concentrations or immune mediators and HIV risk were analyzed using generalized estimating equations in a multivariable model. Factor analysis assessed relationships between combinations of bacterial taxa, immune mediators, and HIV acquisition risk. RESULTS: We identified 177 HIV pre-seroconversion visits from 150 women who acquired HIV and 531 visits from 436 women who remained HIV uninfected. Fourteen bacterial taxa and 6 proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines were individually associated with greater HIV risk after adjusting for confounders. Women with all 14 taxa versus <14 taxa (adjusted odds ratio [aOR], 4.45 [95% confidence interval {CI}, 2.20-8.98]; P < .001) or all 6 immune mediators versus <6 mediators (aOR, 1.77 [95% CI, 1.24-2.52]; P < .001) had greater risk for HIV acquisition. Factor analysis demonstrated that a bacterial factor comprised of 14 high-risk bacterial taxa (aOR, 1.57 [95% CI, 1.27-1.93]; P < 0.001) and the interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (highest quartile: aOR, 3.19 [95% CI, 1.32-7.72]; P = 0.002) contributed to the highest HIV risk. CONCLUSIONS: Bacterial and host biomarkers for predicting HIV acquisition risk identify women at greatest risk for HIV infection and can focus prevention efforts.

Summary statistics of gut microbiota were obtained from a multi-ethnic Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) meta-analysis, including 119 taxa from 18,340 Europeans. PM/DM statistics were extracted from GWAS analyses. Mendelian randomization (MR) with IVW, MR-Egger, and weighted median methods was performed. Sensitivity analyses addressed heterogeneity and pleiotropy. Of the 119 bacterial genera studied, six showed causal links. RESULTS: Alloprevotella (OR: 3.075, 95% CI: 1.127-8.386, p = 0.028), Ruminococcaceae UCG003 (OR: 4.219, 95% CI: 1.227-14.511, p = 0.022), Dialister (OR: 0.273, 95% CI: 0.077-0.974, p = 0.045) were associated with PM. Anaerotruncus (OR: 0.314, 95% CI: 0.112-0.882, p = 0.028), Ruminococcaceae UCG002 (OR: 2.439, 95% CI: 1.173-5.071, p = 0.017), Sutterella (OR: 3.392, 95% CI: 1.302-8.839, p = 0.012) were related to DM. Sensitivity analyses validated these associations. DISCUSSION: We establish causal relationships between Ruminococcaceae, Sutterella, Anaerotruncus with DM, Alloprevotella, Ruminococcaceae UCG003, and Dialister with PM. Common microbiota, like Ruminococcaceae, have significant clinical implications. These findings open up greater possibilities for the gut microbiota to contribute to the development of PM/DM and for future monitoring of the gut microbiota in patients with PM/DM.

Genetic data from published genome-wide association studies (GWASs) were employed to determine the causal effects of 207 taxa and 205 bacterial pathways on GC via two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) and two-step mediation MR analysis. In this study, 731 immune cell traits served as potential mediators. An inverse variance-weighted (IVW) estimation, augmented by a range of alternative estimators, notably the Bayesian-weighted MR method, was employed as the primary methodological approach. RESULTS: Four taxa and five bacterial pathways were found to be negatively correlated with GC, whereas one taxon and two bacterial pathways were a positively correlated with GC. Reverse causality was not found in the reverse MR analysis. Additional validation was performed using a sensitivity analysis. Mediation MR analyses revealed that the GM influences GC through various phenotypes of 16 immune cells that act as mediators. For example, s_Alistipes_sp_AP11 was found to inhibit GC through NKT %T cell (total effect: -0.3234, mediation effect: 0.0212). This mediating effect further highlights the complex relationship among GMs, immune cell traits, and their combined effects on GC. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings highlight the genetic connection between specific GMs and GC, emphasizing the potential role of immune cells as mediators, and offering valuable perspectives on potential therapeutic strategies that manipulating the GM to address GC.

Oral microbiota comprises polymicrobial communities shaped by mutualistic coevolution with the host, contributing to homeostasis and regulating immune function. Nevertheless, dysbiosis of oral bacterial communities is associated with a number of clinical symptoms that ranges from infections to oral cancer. Peri-implant diseases are biofilm-associated inflammatory conditions affecting the soft and hard tissues around dental implants. Characterization and identification of the biofilm community are essential for the understanding of the pathophysiology of such diseases. For that sampling methods should be representative of the biofilm communities Therefore, there is a need to know the effect of different sampling strategies on the biofilm characterization by next generation sequencing. METHODS: With the aim of selecting an appropriate microbiome sampling procedure for periimplant biofilms, next generation sequencing was used for characterizing the bacterial communities obtained by three different sampling strategies two months after transepithelial abutment placement: adjacent periodontal crevicular fluid (ToCF), crevicular fluid from transepithelial abutment (TACF) and transepithelial abutment (TA). RESULTS: Significant differences in multiple alpha diversity indices were detected at both the OTU and the genus level between different sampling procedures. Differentially abundant taxa were detected between sample collection strategies, including peri-implant health and disease related taxa. At the community level significant differences were also detected between TACF and TA and also between TA and ToCF. Moreover, differential network properties and association patterns were identified. CONCLUSIONS: The selection of sample collection strategy can significantly affect the community composition and structure. TRIAL REGISTRATION: This research is part of a randomized clinical trial that was designed to assess the effect of transepithelial abutment surface on the biofilm formation. The trial was registered at Trial Registration ClinicalTrials.gov under the number NCT03554876.

Neither alpha nor beta diversity of the gut microbiota differed between APS patients (n = 15) and controls (n = 16) and no taxa were differentially abundant. Moreover, fecal SCFAs and fecal calprotectin, did not differ between the groups. CONCLUSION: Gut microbiome effects on the APS phenotype are likely not driven by bacterial overabundance, SCFA production or intestinal inflammation.

The oral microbiome comprises distinct microbial communities that colonize diverse ecological niches across the oral cavity, the composition of which are influenced by nutrient and substrate availability, host genetics, diet, behavior, age, and other diverse host and environmental factors. Unlike other densely populated human-associated microbial ecosystems (e.g., gut, urogenital), the oral microbiome is regularly and directly exposed to the external environment and is therefore likely less stable over time. Cross sectional studies of the oral microbiome capture a glimpse of this temporal dynamism, yet a full appreciation of the relative stability, robusticity, and spatial structure of the oral environment is necessary to understand the role of microbial communities in promoting health or disease. RESULTS: Here we investigate the spatial and temporal stability of the oral microbiome over three sampling time points in the context of HIV infection and exposure. Individual teeth were sampled from a cohort of 565 Nigerian children with varying levels of tooth decay severity (i.e., caries disease). We collected 1,960 supragingival plaque samples and characterized the oral microbiome using a metataxonomic approach targeting an approximately 478 bp region of the bacterial rpoC gene. We found that both infection and exposure to HIV have significant effects on the stability of the supragingival plaque microbiome at both the spatial and temporal scale. Specifically, we detect (1) significantly lower taxonomic turnover of the oral community among exposed and infected children compared to unexposed children, (2) we find that HIV infection homogenizes the oral community across the anterior and posterior dentition, and (3) that impaired immunity (i.e., low CD4 count) and low taxonomic turnover over time in children living with HIV is associated with higher frequency of cariogenic taxa including Streptococcus mutans. CONCLUSIONS: Our results document substantial community fluctuations over time in children unexposed to HIV independent of oral health status. This suggests that the oral community, under typical conditions, rapidly adapts to environmental perturbations to maintain homeostasis and that long-term taxonomic rigidity is a signal of community dysfunction, potentially leading to a higher incidence of oral disease including caries.

We conducted a cross-sectional metagenomic cohort analysis of stool samples from residents of five long-term aged-care facilities in South Australia. Taxonomic composition was determined, and enteric carriage of antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) was identified and quantified against the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database. Both the detection and abundance of stool taxa and ARGs were related to antibiotic exposures up to 12 months prior. Factors associated with the abundance of ARGs of high clinical concern were identified. RESULTS: Stool samples were provided by 164 participants (median age: 88 years, IQR 81-93; 72% female). Sixty-one percent (n = 100) of participants were prescribed antibiotics at least once in the prior 12 months (median prescriptions: 4, range: 1-52), most commonly a penicillin (n = 55, 33.5%), cephalosporin (n = 53, 32.3%), diaminopyrimidine (trimethoprim) (n = 36, 22%), or tetracycline (doxycycline) (n = 21, 12.8%). More than 1100 unique ARGs, conferring resistance to 38 antibiotic classes, were identified, including 20 ARGs of high clinical concern. Multivariate logistic regression showed doxycycline exposure to be the greatest risk factor for high ARG abundance (adjusted odds ratio [aOR]=14.8, q<0.001) and a significant contributor to inter-class selection, particularly for ARGs relating to penicillins (aOR=3.1, q=0.0004) and cephalosporins (aOR=3.4, q=0.003). High enteric ARG abundance was associated with the number of separate antibiotic exposures (aOR: 6.4, q<0.001), exposures within the prior 30 days (aOR: 4.6, q=0.008) and prior 30-100 days (aOR: 2.6, q=0.008), high duration of antibiotic exposure (aOR: 7.9, q<0.001), and exposure to 3 or more antibiotic classes (aOR: 7.4, q<0.001). Carriage of one or more ARGs of high clinical concern was identified in 99% of participants (n = 162, median: 3, IQR: 2-4), involving 11 ARGs conferring resistance to aminoglycosides, four to beta-lactams, one to glycopeptides, three to fluoroquinolones, and one to oxazolidinones. Carriage of ARGs of high clinical concern was positively associated with exposure to doxycycline (aminoglycoside, fluoroquinolone, and oxazolidinone ARGs) and trimethoprim (fluoroquinolone and beta-lactam ARGs). Analysis of doxycycline impact on microbiota composition suggested that observed resistome changes arose principally through direct ARG selection, rather than through the antibiotic depletion of sensitive bacterial populations. CONCLUSIONS: The gut microbiome of aged care residents is a major reservoir of antibiotic resistance. As a critical antibiotic in medical practice, a comprehensive understanding of the impact of doxycycline exposure on the gut resistome is paramount for informed antibiotic use, particularly in an evolving landscape of prophylactic applications. Near-universal asymptomatic carriage of clinically critical resistance determinants is highly concerning and reinforces the urgent need for improved management of antibiotic use in long-term aged care.

This study identifies the gut microbiota changes associated with the D. antillarum during this mortality event. It contrasts them with the bacterial composition of gut samples from healthy individuals collected in 2019 by using 16S rRNA sequencing analyses. RESULTS: Notably, the die-off group's core microbiome resembled bacteria commonly found in the human skin and gut, suggesting potential anthropogenic contamination and wastewater pollution as contributing factors to the 2022 dysbiosis. The animals collected in 2022, especially those with signs of disease, lacked keystone taxa normally found in Diadema including Photobacterium and Propionigenium. DISCUSSION: The association between human microbes and disease stages in the long-spined urchin D. antillarum, especially in relation to anthropogenic contamination, highlights a complex interplay between environmental stressors and marine health. While these microbes might not be the direct cause of death in this species of sea urchins, their presence and proliferation can indicate underlying issues, such as immune depletion due to pollution, habitat destruction, or climate change, that ultimately compromise the health of these marine organisms.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have emerged as an effective treatment for colorectal cancer (CRC). Studies indicate that the composition of gut microbiota could potentially serve as a biomarker for predicting the clinical effectiveness of immune checkpoint inhibitors. METHODS: Following PRISMA guidelines, the review was conducted after registering the protocol with PROSPERO. A comprehensive literature search was carried out across five databases: PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane Library. Assessment tools from the National Institutes of Health (NIH) were used to gauge the quality of the studies. RESULTS: A total of 5,132 papers were identified, and three studies and one conference abstract published between 2017-2022 met the inclusion criteria and were summarized in a descriptive synthesis table. These four studies were in accord with the following findings, four main phyla, Firmicutes, Bacteroidata, Actinobacteria, and Verrucomicrobiota were associated with CRC patients' clinical response toward ICIs treatment. Ruminococcaceae was predominantly related to CRC patients responding to therapy, while the Micrococcaceae family was more common among the non-responders. Bacterial taxa such as Faecalibacterium and Prevotellaceae were associated with better responses to ICIs and could be predictive biomarkers. The signature of fecal microbiota with Akkermansia muciniphila and Eubacterium rectale enrichment, and Rothia mucilaginosa depletion could independently predict better response to ICIs in patients with CRC. CONCLUSION: The findings have brought attention to the notable differences in terms of richness and composition of microbiota between patients who responded positively to the treatment and those who did not. Bacterial species and families, such as Faecalibacterium, Bifidobacterium, Lachnospiraceae, Akkermansia sp., Ruminococcaceae, and Prevotellaceae, have consistently surfaced as potential indicators of immunotherapeutic responses. Furthermore, this review also emphasizes the need for additional comprehensive, multi-center studies with larger sample sizes to validate reported microbiota and expand our understanding of the role of gut microbiota in CRC ICIs therapy. PROSPERO ID: CRD42021277691.

APOH plays an essential role in lipid metabolism and the transport of lipids in the circulation. Previous studies have shown that APOH deficiency causes fatty liver and gut microbiota dysbiosis in mouse models. However, the role and potential mechanisms of APOH deficiency in the pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease remain unclear. METHODS: C57BL/6 WT and ApoH-/- mice were used to construct the binge-on-chronic alcohol feeding model. Mouse liver transcriptome, targeted bile acid metabolome, and 16S gut bacterial taxa were assayed and analyzed. Open-source human liver transcriptome dataset was analyzed. RESULTS: ApoH-/- mice fed with alcohol showed severe hepatic steatosis. Liver RNAseq and RT-qPCR data indicated that APOH deficiency predominantly impacts hepatic lipid metabolism by disrupting de novo lipogenesis, cholesterol processing, and bile acid metabolism. A targeted bile acid metabolomics assay indicated significant changes in bile acid composition, including increased percentages of TCA in the liver and DCA in the gut of alcohol-fed ApoH-/- mice. The concentrations of CA, NorCA, and HCA in the liver were higher in ApoH-/- mice on an ethanol diet compared to the control mice (p < 0.05). Additionally, APOH deficiency altered the composition of gut flora, which correlated with changes in the liver bile acid composition in the ethanol-feeding mouse model. Finally, open-source transcript-level data from human ALD livers highlighted a remarkable link between APOH downregulation and steatohepatitis, as well as bile acid metabolism. CONCLUSION: APOH deficiency aggravates alcohol induced hepatic steatosis through the disruption of gut microbiota homeostasis and bile acid metabolism in mice.

This study investigated the bidirectional causality between gut microbiota and HSP and ITP using Mendelian randomization (MR). Large-scale genetic data of gut microbiota at phylum to species level from the MiBioGen consortium and the Dutch Microbiome Project were utilized. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) summary statistics for HSP and ITP came from FinnGen R10. Various MR methods were applied to infer causal relationships, including inverse variance weighted (IVW), maximum likelihood (ML), cML-MA, MR-Egger, weighted median, weighted model, and MR-PRESSO. Multiple sensitivity analyses and Bonferroni correction were conducted to enhance robustness and reliability. RESULTS: Based on the IVW estimates, 23 bacterial taxa were identified to have suggestive associations with HSP and ITP. Remarkably, after Bonferroni correction, family Alcaligenaceae (OR = 2.86, 95% CI = 1.52-5.37; IVW, p = 1.10 × 10-3, ML, p = 1.40 × 10-3) was significantly associated with ITP as a risk factor, while family Bacteroidales S24 7group (OR = 0.46, 95% CI = 0.29-0.74; IVW, p = 1.40 × 10-3) was significantly associated with ITP as a protective factor. No significant associations between HSP and ITP and gut microbiota were found in reverse analyses. CONCLUSION: Our study provides evidence of causal effects of gut microbiota on HSP and ITP, highlighting the importance of further research to clarify the underlying mechanisms and develop targeted therapeutic interventions for these autoimmune diseases.

This study was performed in Astana, Kazakhstan, and included 77 Kazakh female patients older than 18 years, who met the American College of Rheumatology 2010 classification criteria for rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and 113 healthy controls. The DNA was extracted from fecal samples obtained from all study participants for subsequent sequencing at the 16S rRNA gene V1-V3 locus, facilitating the analysis of the gut microbiome. The Multiplex immunoassay was employed to measure the concentrations of inflammatory cytokines, chemokines, and immunoglobulins in both fecal and plasma samples. RESULTS: Our taxonomic analysis revealed significant differences in the composition of the gut microbiota between the healthy control cohort and the cohort with rheumatoid arthritis RA. Alpha diversity was significantly lower in the RA group. Lachnospiraceae were the most abundant taxon and found to be crucial, showing correlations with immunological markers such as IL5. Additionally, Lachnospiraceae and Oscillospiraceae exhibited the most predictable power and distinguished the composition of both study groups. CONCLUSION: Our study identifies key differences in the gut microbiome of RA patients, revealing distinct microbial patterns and specific taxa abundance. We highlight potential biomarkers in immunological and bacterial pathways, offering insights into RA development and indicating possibilities for personalized treatment.

The Borreliaceae family includes many obligate parasitic bacterial species which are etiologically associated with a myriad of zoonotic borrelioses including Lyme disease and vector-borne relapsing fevers. Infections by the Borreliaceae are difficult to detect by both direct and indirect methods, often leading to delayed and missed diagnoses. Efforts to improve diagnoses center around the development of molecular diagnostics (MDx), but due to deep tissue sequestration of the causative spirochaetes and the lack of persistent bacteremias, even MDx assays suffer from a lack of sensitivity. Additionally, the highly extensive genomic heterogeneity among isolates, even within the same species, contributes to the lack of assay sensitivity as single target assays cannot provide universal coverage. This within-species heterogeneity is partly due to differences in replicon repertoires and genomic structures that have likely arisen to support the complex Borreliaceae lifecycle in which these parasites have to survive in multiple hosts each with unique immune responses. RESULTS: We constructed a Borreliaceae family-level pangenome and characterized the phylogenetic relationships among the constituent taxa which supports the recent taxonomy of splitting the family into at least two genera. Gene content pro les were created for the majority of the Borreliaceae replicons, providing for the first time their unambiguous molecular typing. CONCLUSION: Our characterization of the Borreliaceae pan-genome supports the splitting of the former Borrelia genus into two genera and provides for the phylogenetic placement of several non-species designated isolates. Mining this family-level pangenome will enable precision diagnostics corresponding to gene content-driven clinical outcomes while also providing targets for interventions.

Previous studies have highlighted a robust correlation between gut microbiota/immune cells and ischemic stroke (IS). However, the precise nature of their causal relationship remains uncertain. To address this gap, our study aims to meticulously investigate the causal association between gut microbiota/immune cells and the likelihood of developing IS, employing a two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. METHODS: Our comprehensive analysis utilized summary statistics from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on gut microbiota, immune cells, and IS. The primary MR method employed was the inverse variance-weighted (IVW) approach. To address potential pleiotropy and identify outlier genetic variants, we incorporated the Mendelian randomization pleiotropy residual sum and outlier (MR-PRESSO) technique, along with MR-Egger regression. Heterogeneity was assessed using Cochran's Q-test. Additionally, leave-one-out analysis was conducted to pinpoint any individual genetic variant influencing the observed causal associations. Finally, a reverse MR analysis was performed to explore the potential of reverse causation. RESULTS: Our investigation revealed four gut microbial taxa and 16 immune cells with a significant causal relationship with IS (p < 0.05). Notably, two bacterial features and five immunophenotypes were strongly associated with a lower IS risk: genus.Barnesiella.id.944 (OR: 0.907, 95% CI: 0.836-0.983, p = 0.018), genus.LachnospiraceaeNK4A136group.id.11319 (OR: 0.918, 95% CI: 0.853-0.983, p = 0.988), Activated & resting Treg % CD4++ (OR: 0.977, 95% CI: 0.956-0.998, p = 0.028). Additionally, significant associations between IS risk and two bacterial features along with eleven immunophenotypes were observed: genus.Paraprevotella.id.962 (OR: 1.106, 95% CI: 1.043-1.172, p < 0.001), genus.Streptococcus.id.1853 (OR: 1.119, 95% CI: 1.034-1.210, p = 0.005), CD127 on granulocyte (OR: 1.039, 95% CI: 1.009-1.070, p = 0.011). Our analyses did not reveal heterogeneity based on the Cochrane's Q-test (p > 0.05) nor indicate instances of horizontal pleiotropy according to MR-Egger and MR-PRESSO analyses (p > 0.05). Furthermore, the robustness of our MR results was confirmed through leave-one-out analysis. CONCLUSION: Our study provides further evidence supporting the potential association between gut microbiota and immune cells in relation to IS, shedding light on the underlying mechanisms that may contribute to this condition. These findings lay a solid foundation for future investigations into targeted prevention strategies.

A literature search for peer-reviewed publications about the microbiome and immunotherapy response in bladder, kidney, and prostate cancer was conducted. All research available in PubMed, Google Scholar, clinicaltrials.gov, and bioRxiv up to September 2023 was analyzed. RESULTS: Significant differences in urinary microbiota composition have been found in patients with genitourinary cancers compared to healthy controls. Lactic acid-producing bacteria, such as Bifidobacterium and Lactobacillus genera, may have value in augmenting BCG responsiveness to bladder cancer. BCG may also be a dynamic regulator of PD-L1. Thus, the combination of BCG and immune checkpoint inhibitors may be an effective strategy for bladder cancer management. In advanced renal cell carcinoma, studies show that recent antibiotic administration negatively impacts survival outcomes in patients undergoing immunotherapy, while administration of CBM588, a live bacterial product, is associated with improved progression-free survival. Specific bacterial taxa, such as Streptococcus salivarius, have been linked with response to pembrolizumab in metastatic castrate-resistant prostate cancer. Fecal microbiota transplant has been shown to overcome resistance and reduce toxicity to immunotherapy; it is currently being investigated for both kidney and prostate cancers. CONCLUSIONS: Although the exact mechanism is unclear, several studies identify a symbiotic relationship between microbiota-centered interventions and immunotherapy efficacy. It is possible to improve immunotherapy responsiveness in genitourinary malignancies using the microbiome, but further research with more standardized methodology is warranted.

Ruminant gut microbiota are critical in ecological adaptation, evolution, and nutrition utilization because it regulates energy metabolism, promotes nutrient absorption, and improves immune function. To study the functional roles of key gut microbiota in sheep and goats, it is essential to construct reference microbial gene catalogs and high-quality microbial genomes database. RESULTS: A total of 320 fecal samples were collected from 21 different sheep and goat breeds, originating from 32 distinct farms. Metagenomic deep sequencing and binning assembly were utilized to construct a comprehensive microbial genome information database for the gut microbiota. We successfully generated the largest reference gene catalogs for gut microbiota in sheep and goats, containing over 162 million and 82 million nonredundant predicted genes, respectively, with 49 million shared nonredundant predicted genes and 1138 shared species. We found that the rearing environment has a greater impact on microbial composition and function than the host's species effect. Through subsequent assembly, we obtained 5810 medium- and high-quality metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs), out of which 2661 were yet unidentified species. Among these MAGs, we identified 91 bacterial taxa that specifically colonize the sheep gut, which encode polysaccharide utilization loci for glycan and mucin degradation. CONCLUSIONS: By shedding light on the co-symbiotic microbial communities in the gut of small ruminants, our study significantly enhances the understanding of their nutrient degradation and disease susceptibility. Our findings emphasize the vast potential of untapped resources in functional bacterial species within ruminants, further expanding our knowledge of how the ruminant gut microbiota recognizes and processes glycan and mucins. Video Abstract.

The association between gut bacteria and the response to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICI) in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been studied; however, multi-kingdom gut microbiome alterations and interactions in ICI-treated HCC cohorts are not fully understood. METHODS: From November 2018 to April 2022, patients receiving ICI treatment for advanced HCC were prospectively enrolled. Herein, we investigated the multi-kingdom microbiota characterization of the gut microbiome, mycobiome, and metabolome using metagenomic, ITS2, and metabolomic data sets of 80 patients with ICI-treated HCC. RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated that bacteria and metabolites differed significantly between the durable clinical benefit (DCB) and non-durable clinical benefit (NDB) groups, whereas the differences were smaller for fungi. The overall diversity of bacteria and fungi before treatment was higher in the DCB group than in the NDB group, and the difference in diversity began to change with the use of immunotherapy after 6-8 weeks. We also explored the alterations of gut microbes in the DCB and NDB groups, established 18 bacterial species models as predictive biomarkers for predicting whether immunotherapy is of sustained benefit (area under the curve=75.63%), and screened two species of bacteria (Actinomyces_sp_ICM47, and Senegalimassilia_anaerobia) and one metabolite (galanthaminone) as prognostic biomarkers for predicting survival in patients with HCC treated with ICI. CONCLUSIONS: In this study, the status and characterization of the multi-kingdom microbiota, including gut bacteria, fungi, and their metabolites, were described by multiomics sequencing for the first time in patients with HCC treated with ICI. Our findings demonstrate the potential of bacterial taxa as predictive biomarkers of ICI clinical efficacy, and bacteria and their metabolites as prognostic biomarkers.

Chronic endometritis (CE) is associated with poor reproductive outcomes, yet the role of endometrial microbiota in patients with recurrent implantation failure (RIF) and CE remains unclear. This study aims to characterize endometrial microbiota in RIF patients with CE and assess its implications for reproductive outcomes. METHODS: In this prospective study, we enrolled RIF patients both with and without CE. Endometrial and cervical samples were collected for 16 S rRNA gene sequencing. Microbiota composition was compared between groups using diversity indices, phylum, and genus-level analysis. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to assess relationships between CE, reproductive outcomes, and microbiota. Predictive functional profiling was performed to evaluate metabolic pathways associated with CE. RESULTS: Endometrial microbiota in CE patients exhibited greater diversity and evenness compared to non-CE patients. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) revealed distinct clustering between CE and non-CE groups. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) identified Proteobacteria, Aminicenantales, and Chloroflexaceae as characteristic of CE, while Lactobacillus, Acinetobacter, Herbaspirillum, Ralstonia, Shewanela, and Micrococcaceae were associated with non-CE. CCA demonstrated associations between CE, adverse reproductive outcomes, and specific bacterial taxa. Microbial metabolic pathways significantly differed between CE and non-CE groups, with enrichment in pathways related to cofactors, vitamins, secondary metabolites, and the immune system in CE patients. CONCLUSION: RIF patients with CE exhibit distinct endometrial microbiota compositions associated with adverse reproductive outcomes. The increased microbial diversity and altered metabolic pathways in CE suggest a potential correlation with reproductive outcomes, although further studies are necessary to elucidate the causal relationship between microbiota alterations and fertility. Modulating the endometrial microbiome may represent a novel therapeutic strategy to improve IVF outcomes in patients with CE.

Engaging in anal sexual intercourse markedly increases the risk of developing HIV among men who have sex with men (MSM); oral sexual activities tend to uniquely introduce gut-derived microbes to salivary microbiota, which, combined with an individual's positive HIV status, may greatly perturb oral microecology. However, till date, only a few published studies have addressed this aspect. METHODS: Based on 16S rRNA sequencing data of bacterial taxa, MicroPITA picks representative samples for metagenomic analysis, effectively revealing how the development and progression of the HIV disease influences oral microbiota in MSM. Therefore, we collected samples from 11 HIV-negative and 44 HIV-positive MSM subjects (stage 0 was defined by HIV RNA positivity, but negative or indeterminate antibody status; stages 1, 2, and 3 were defined by CD4+ T lymphocyte counts ≥ 500, 200-499, and ≤ 200 or opportunistic infection) and selected 25 representative saliva samples (5 cases/stage) using MicroPITA. Metagenomic sequencing analysis were performed to explore whether positive HIV status changes salivary bacterial KEGG function and metabolic pathway in MSM. RESULTS: The core functions of oral microbiota were maintained across each of the five groups, including metabolism, genetic and environmental information processing. All HIV-positive groups displayed KEGG functions of abnormal proliferation, most prominently at stage 0, and others related to metabolism. Clustering relationship analysis tentatively identified functional relationships between groups, with bacterial function being more similar between stage 0-control groups and stage 1-2 groups, whereas the stage 3 group exhibited large functional changes. Although we identified most metabolic pathways as being common to all five groups, several unique pathways formed clusters for certain groups; the stage 0 group had several, while the stage 2 and 3 groups had few, such clusters. The abundance of K03046 was positively correlated with CD4 counts. CONCLUSION: As HIV progresses, salivary bacterial function and metabolic pathways in MSM progressively changes, which may be related to HIV promoting abnormal energy metabolism and exacerbate pathogen virulence. Further, infection and drug resistance of acute stage and immune cell destruction of AIDS stage were abnormally increased, predicting an increased risk for MSM individuals to develop systemic and oral diseases.

Insect gut microbiomes play a fundamental role in various aspects of insect physiology, including digestion, nutrient metabolism, detoxification, immunity, growth and development. The wild Muga silkworm, Antheraea assamensis Helfer holds significant economic importance, as it produces golden silk. METHODS AND RESULTS: In the current investigation, we deciphered its intricate gut bacteriome through high-throughput 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing. Further, to understand bacterial community dynamics among silkworms raised under outdoor environmental conditions, we compared its gut bacteriomes with those of the domesticated mulberry silkworm, Bombyx mori L. Most abundant bacterial phyla identified in the gut of A. assamensis were Proteobacteria (78.1%), Bacteroidetes (8.0%) and Firmicutes (6.6%), whereas the most-abundant phyla in B. mori were Firmicutes (49-86%) and Actinobacteria (10-36%). Further, Gammaproteobacteria (57.1%), Alphaproteobacteria (10.47%) and Betaproteobacteria (8.28%) were the dominant bacterial classes found in the gut of A. assamensis. The predominant bacterial families in A. assamensis gut were Enterobacteriaceae (27.7%), Comamonadaceae (9.13%), Pseudomonadaceae (9.08%) Flavobacteriaceae (7.59%) Moraxellaceae (7.38%) Alteromonadaceae (6.8%) and Enterococcaceae (4.46%). In B. mori, the most-abundant bacterial families were Peptostreptococcaceae, Enterococcaceae, Lactobacillaceae and Bifidobacteriaceae, though all showed great variability among the samples. The core gut bacteriome of A. assamensis consisted of Pseudomonas, Acinetobacter, Variovorax, Myroides, Alteromonas, Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Sphingomonas, Brevundimonas, Oleispira, Comamonas, Oleibacter Vagococcus, Aminobacter, Marinobacter, Cupriavidus, Aeromonas, and Bacillus. Comparative gut bacteriome analysis revealed a more complex gut bacterial diversity in wild A. assamensis silkworms than in domesticated B. mori silkworms, which contained a relatively simple gut bacteriome as estimated by OTU richness. Predictive functional profiling of the gut bacteriome suggested that gut bacteria in A. assamensis were associated with a wide range of physiological, nutritional, and metabolic functions, including biodegradation of xenobiotics, lipid, amino acid, carbohydrate metabolism, and biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and amino acids. CONCLUSIONS: These results showed great differences in the composition and diversity of gut bacteria between the two silkworm species. Both insect species harbored core bacterial taxa commonly found in insects, but the relative abundance and composition of these taxa varied markedly.

The substantial risk for respiratory and invasive infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn) among people with HIV-1 (PWH) begins with asymptomatic colonization. The frequency of Spn colonization among U.S. adults with and without HIV-1 infection is not well-characterized in the conjugate vaccine era. METHODS: We determined Spn colonization frequency by culture and specific lytA gene QPCR and microbiota profile by 16S rRNA gene sequencing in nasopharyngeal (NP) and oropharyngeal (OP) DNA from 138 PWH and 93 control adults and associated clinical characteristics. RESULTS: The frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls did not differ (11.6% vs 8.6%, respectively; p=0.46) using combined results of culture and PCR, independent of vaccination or behavioral risks. PWH showed altered microbiota composition (i.e., beta-diversity. NP: p=0.0028, OP: p=0.0098), decreased alpha-diversity (NP: p=0.024, OP: p=0.0045), and differences in the relative abundance of multiple bacterial taxa. Spn colonization was associated with altered beta-diversity in the NP (p=0.011), but not OP (p=0.21). CONCLUSIONS: Despite widespread conjugate vaccine and antiretroviral use, frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls are currently consistent with those reported in the pre-conjugate era. The persistently increased risk of pneumococcal disease despite ART may relate to behavioral and immunologic variables other than colonization.

Cross-sectional study including 38 adenomyosis patients and 46 controls, performed between September 2021 and October 2022 in a university hospital-based research center. The diagnosis of adenomyosis was based on sonographic criteria. Fecal, vaginal, and endometrial samples were collected. Study of the microbiota using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: Patients with adenomyosis exhibited a significant reduction in the gut microbial alpha diversity compared with healthy controls (Chao1 p = 0.012, Fisher p = 0.005, Observed species p = 0.005). Beta-diversity analysis showed significant differences in the compositions of both gut and vaginal microbiota between adenomyosis patients and the control group (Adonis p-value = 0.001; R2 = 0.03 and Adonis p-value = 0.034; R2 = 0.04 respectively). Specific bacterial taxa were found to be either overrepresented (Rhodospirillales, Ruminococcus gauvreauii group, Ruminococcaceae, and Actinomyces) or underrepresented in the gut and endometrial microbiota of adenomyosis patients compared with controls. Distinct microbiota profiles were identified among patients with internal and external adenomyosis phenotypes. CONCLUSIONS: The study revealed reduced gut microbiota diversity in adenomyosis patients, accompanied by distinct compositions in gut and vaginal microbiota compared with controls. Overrepresented or underrepresented bacterial taxa were noted in the gut and endometrial microbiota of adenomyosis patients, with variations in microbiota profiles among those with internal and external adenomyosis phenotypes. These findings suggest a potential association between microbiota and adenomyosis, indicating the need for further research to comprehensively understand the implications of these differences.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an immune-mediated chronic inflammatory condition with a worldwide distribution. Although the etiology of this disease is still unknown, the understanding of the role of the microbiota is becoming increasingly strong. AIM: To investigate the predictive power of the gut microbiota for the diagnosis of UC in a cohort of newly diagnosed treatment-naïve Saudi children with UC. METHODS: The study population included 20 children with a confirmed diagnosis of UC and 20 healthy controls. Microbial DNA was extracted and sequenced, and shotgun metagenomic analysis was performed for bacteria and bacteriophages. Biostatistics and bioinformatics demonstrated significant dysbiosis in the form of reduced alpha diversity, beta diversity, and significant difference of abundance of taxa between children with UC and control groups. The receiver operating characteristic curve, a probability curve, was used to determine the difference between the UC and control groups. The area under the curve (AUC) represents the degree of separability between the UC group and the control group. The AUC was calculated for all identified bacterial species and for bacterial species identified by the random forest classification algorithm as important potential biomarkers of UC. A similar method of AUC calculation for all bacteriophages and important species was used. RESULTS: The median age and range were 14 (0.5-21) and 12.9 (6.8-16.3) years for children with UC and controls, respectively, and 40% and 35% were male for children with UC and controls, respectively. The AUC for all identified bacterial species was 89.5%. However, when using the bacterial species identified as important by random forest classification algorithm analysis, the accuracy increased to 97.6%. Similarly, the AUC for all the identified bacteriophages was 87.4%, but this value increased to 94.5% when the important bacteriophage biomarkers were used. CONCLUSION: The very high to excellent AUCs of fecal bacterial and viral species suggest the potential use of noninvasive microbiota-based tests for the diagnosis of unusual cases of UC in children. In addition, the identification of important bacteria and bacteriophages whose abundance is reduced in children with UC suggests the potential of preventive and adjuvant microbial therapy for UC.

Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency worldwide, particularly for young children and females of reproductive age. Although oral iron supplements are routinely recommended and generally considered safe, iron supplementation has been shown to alter the fecal microbiota in low-income countries. Little is known about the effect of iron supplementation on the fecal microbiota in high-income settings. OBJECTIVES: To assess the effect of oral iron supplementation compared with placebo on the gut microbiome in nonpregnant females of reproductive age in a high-income country. METHODS: A 21-d prospective parallel design double-blind, randomized control trial conducted in South Australia, Australia. Females (18-45 y) were randomly assigned to either iron (65.7 mg ferrous fumarate) or placebo. Fecal samples were collected prior to commencing supplements and after 21 d of supplementation. The primary outcome was microbiota β-diversity (paired-sample weighted unique fraction metric dissimilarity) between treatment and placebo groups after 21 d of supplementation. Exploratory outcomes included changes in the relative abundance of bacterial taxa. RESULTS: Of 82 females randomly assigned, 80 completed the trial. There was no significant difference between the groups for weighted unique fraction metric dissimilarity (mean difference: 0.003; 95% confidence interval: -0.007, 0.014; P = 0.52) or relative abundance of common bacterial taxa or Escherichia-Shigella (q > 0.05). CONCLUSIONS: Iron supplementation did not affect the microbiome of nonpregnant females of reproductive age in Australia. This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT05033483.

Increasing evidence suggests that alterations in gut microbiota are associated with a variety of skin diseases. However, whether this association reflects a causal relationship remains unknown. We aimed to reveal the causal relationship between gut microbiota and skin diseases, including psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, acne, and lichen planus. METHODS: We obtained full genetic association summary data for gut microbiota, psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, acne, and lichen planus from public databases and used three methods, mainly inverse variance weighting, to analyze the causal relationships between gut microbiota and these skin diseases using bidirectional Mendelian randomization, as well as sensitivity and stability analysis of the results using multiple methods. RESULTS: The results showed that there were five associated genera in the psoriasis group, seven associated genera were obtained in the atopic dermatitis group, a total of ten associated genera in the acne group, and four associated genera in the lichen planus group. The results corrected for false discovery rate showed that Eubacteriumfissicatenagroup (P = 2.20E-04, OR = 1.24, 95%CI:1.11-1.40) and psoriasis still showed a causal relationship. In contrast, in the reverse Mendelian randomization results, there was no evidence of an association between these skin diseases and gut microbiota. CONCLUSION: We demonstrated a causal relationship between gut microbiota and immune skin diseases and provide a new therapeutic perspective for the study of immune diseases: targeted modulation of dysregulation of specific bacterial taxa to prevent and treat psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, acne, and lichen planus.

Probiotics are a potentially effective therapy for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); IBD is linked to impaired gut microbiota and intestinal immunity. However, the utilization of an antibiotic cocktail (Abx) prior to the probiotic intervention remains controversial. This study aims to identify the effect of Abx pretreatment from dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis and to evaluate whether Abx pretreatment has an enhanced effect on the protection of Clostridium butyricum Miyairi588 (CBM) from colitis. RESULTS: The inflammation, dysbiosis, and dysfunction of gut microbiota as well as T cell response were both enhanced by Abx pretreatment. Additionally, CBM significantly alleviated the DSS-induced colitis and impaired gut epithelial barrier, and Abx pretreatment could enhance these protective effects. Furthermore, CBM increased the benefit bacteria abundance and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) level with Abx pretreatment. CBM intervention after Abx pretreatment regulated the imbalance of cytokines and transcription factors, which corresponded to lower infiltration of Th1 and Th17 cells, and increased Th2 cells. CONCLUSIONS: Abx pretreatment reinforced the function of CBM in ameliorating inflammation and barrier damage by increasing beneficial taxa, eliminating pathogens, and inducing a protective Th2 cell response. This study reveals a link between Abx pretreatment, microbiota, and immune response changes in colitis, which provides a reference for the further application of Abx pretreatment before microbiota-based intervention.

In cancer patients receiving immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), there is emerging evidence suggesting a correlation between gut microbiota and immune-related adverse events (irAEs). However, the exact roles of gut microbiota and the causal associations are yet to be clarified. METHODS: To investigate this, we first conducted a univariable bi-directional two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis. Instrumental variables (IVs) for gut microbiota were retrieved from the MiBioGen consortium (18,340 participants). GWAS summary data for irAEs were gathered from an ICIs-treated cohort with 1,751 cancer patients. Various MR analysis methods, including inverse variance weighted (IVW), MR PRESSO, maximum likelihood (ML), weighted median, weighted mode, and cML-MA-BIC, were used. Furthermore, multivariable MR (MVMR) analysis was performed to account for possible influencing instrumental variables. RESULTS: Our analysis identified fourteen gut bacterial taxa that were causally associated with irAEs. Notably, Lachnospiraceae was strongly associated with an increased risk of both high-grade and all-grade irAEs, even after accounting for the effect of BMI in the MVMR analysis. Akkermansia, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and Anaerostipes were found to exert protective roles in high-grade irAEs. However, Ruminiclostridium6, Coprococcus3, Collinsella, and Eubacterium (fissicatena group) were associated with a higher risk of developing high-grade irAEs. RuminococcaceaeUCG004, and DefluviitaleaceaeUCG011 were protective against all-grade irAEs, whereas Porphyromonadaceae, Roseburia, Eubacterium (brachy group), and Peptococcus were associated with an increased risk of all-grade irAEs. CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis highlights a strong causal association between Lachnospiraceae and irAEs, along with some other gut microbial taxa. These findings provide potential modifiable targets for managing irAEs and warrant further investigation.

In the present study, the changes in the microbiome and microbial metabolic functions were surveyed using metagenomic analysis. The physicochemical parameters, agronomic properties and nutritional qualities were also evaluated. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Results showed that the contents of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin dropped to 10.18, 11.58, 27.53%, respectively at the end of composting. The tunnel composting technology led to significant increases in crude protein content (32.56%) and crude fiber content (13.68%). Variations of physicochemical characteristics led to different successions of microbial communities. Bacteria manifested significantly higher abundance than fungi. Firmicutes, Actinobacteriota, Chloroffexi and Deinococcota were the predominant bacterial phyla. Ascomycota and Basidiomycota were the dominant fungal phyla in the thermophilic phase. Pseudonocardia, Truepera, and Thermopolyspora were positively correlated with the yield of A. subrufescens. In addition to TN, most of the physicochemical properties were significantly correlated with fungal communities in the thermophilic phase. The metabolisms of carbohydrate, amino acid and energy were the primary enrichment pathways. These findings deepen the understanding of microbial communities composition during the composting of A. subrufescens substrates. Moreover, this study provides a basis for improving tunnel composting technology.

Eligible diarrheal children were randomized into intervention group (IG, n = 57) and control group (CG, n = 54), and given probiotics or placebo, respectively. RESULTS: The total duration of diarrhea in the IG (121.4 ± 13.7 h) was significantly shorter than that in the CG (143.9 ± 19.8 h, p < 0.001). More children in the IG showed improvements in diarrhea than those in the CG for both per protocol analysis (70.2 vs. 46.3%, p = 0.01) and intention-to-treat analysis (66.7 vs. 41.7%, p = 0.003). The LL-37 levels in the IG was markedly higher than that in the CG after the intervention (4349.35 ± 1143.86 pg./g vs. 3682.49 ± 869.21 pg./g, p = 0.039). The intervention led to higher abundance of Bifidobacterium longum and lower abundance of Enterococcus faecium, Lactobacillus rhamnosus, and Bacteroides fragilis (p < 0.05). LRa05 treatment upregulated the functional genes of gut microbiota involving immunity regulation. DISCUSSION: Administration of the Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus LRa05 at a dose of 5 × 109 CFU/day to children aged 0-3 years resulted in shorter duration of diarrhea, faster improvement in fecal consistency, and beneficial changes in gut microbiome composition and gene functions. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: The present study has been approved and registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registration Center with the registration number of ChiCTR2100053700 (https://www.chictr.org.cn/showproj.html?proj=141082).

In a cross-sectional study of 123 healthy lactating women, HM samples were collected up to 1 month postpartum and analyzed using the Biocrates MxP Quant 500 kit. Maternal and neonatal clinical, anthropometric, and nutritional data were collected. A total of 432 metabolites were quantified and categorized into 20 groups. The metabolomic profiles formed three distinct clusters, primarily driven by triglyceride concentration differences. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) levels were higher in HM from mothers with vaginal delivery compared to C-section births and differences in hexoses were found between exclusive and mixed-feeding practices. Maternal diets rich in lipids and animal proteins were associated with elevated amino acids, sphingolipids, and glycosyl-ceramides. CONCLUSION: The HM metabolome was grouped into three clusters influenced by delivery mode, lactation practices, and maternal diet. This comprehensive analysis opens new avenues to explore HM composition and offers valuable insights for future dietary interventions aimed at modulating HM.

The gut microbiome has been reported to induce epigenetic modifications in the host, which may be involved in the pathophysiology of metabolic diseases. OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the potential interactions between the gut microbiome and DNA methylome in subjects with different metabolic characteristics. METHODS: Sixty-four participants with different metabolic characteristics (i.e., participants without obesity -healthy controls-, and participants with obesity and normal insulin sensitivity/insulin resistance/ type 2 diabetes-T2DM-) were included in this study. A machine learning approach was performed in order to identify distinctive patterns in three omics (gut microbiome, blood DNA methylome, and visceral adipose tissue-VAT- DNA methylome) according to the different study groups. RESULTS: Robust distinctive distribution patterns of the three different omics were found between healthy controls and patients with obesity; participants with and without T2DM, and patients with obesity with and without insulin resistance. Importantly, strong correlations between the gut microbiome (including Odoribacteriaceae and Christensenllaceae families) and both blood and VAT DNA methylome were found. Moreover, in the entire study population, three main bacterial genera (Sutterella, Collinsella and Eubacterium) were related to the epigenetic regulation of different genes involved in distinct processes related to cellular metabolism and metabolic diseases, including small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) transferase activity or lipid binding. CONCLUSION: We show that distinctive interactions between the gut microbiome and DNA methylome may occur in subjects with different metabolic characteristics. Further research is needed to elucidate the potential role of these interactions in the pathophysiology of obesity and related comorbidities.

Precision nutrition is based on the integration of individual´s phenotypical and biological characteristics including genetic variants, epigenetic marks, gut microbiota profiles and metabolites fingerprints as well as medical history, lifestyle practices, and environmental and cultural factors. Thus, nutriomics areas including Nutrigenomics, Nutrigenetics, Nutriepigenetics, Nutrimetabolomics, and Nutrimetagenomics have emerged to comprehensively understand the complex interactions between nutrients, diet, and the human body's molecular processes through precision nutrition. SUMMARY: This document from the Ibero-American Network of Nutriomics and Precision Nutrition (RINN22; https://rinn22.com/) provides a comprehensive overview of the concepts of precision nutrition approaches to guide their application in clinical and public health as well as establish the position of RINN22 regarding the current and future state of precision nutrition. KEY MESSAGES: The progress and participation of nutriomics to precision nutrition is an essential pillar for addressing diet-related diseases and developing innovative managing strategies, which will be promoted by advances in bioinformatics, machine learning and integrative software as well as the description of specific novel biomarkers. In this context, synthesizing and critically evaluating the latest developments, potential applications and future needs in the field of nutrition is necessary with a holistic perspective, incorporating progress in omics technologies aimed at precision nutrition interventions. This approach must address and confront healthy, social, food security, physically active lifestyle, sanitation and sustainability challenges with preventive, participatory, and predictive strategies of personalized, population and planetary nutrition for a precision tailored health.

Previous studies have shown that microbial communities differ in obese and lean individuals, and dietary fiber can help reduce obesity-related conditions through diet-gut microbiota interactions. However, the mechanisms by which dietary fibers shape the gut microbiota still need to be elucidated. In this in vitro study, we examined how apple fibers affect lean and obese microbial communities on a global scale. We employed a high-throughput micro-matrix bioreactor system and a multi-omics approach to identify the key microorganisms and metabolites involved in this process. RESULTS: Initially, metagenomics and metabolomics data indicated that obese and lean microbial communities had distinct starting microbial communities. We found that obese microbial community had different characteristics, including higher levels of Ruminococcus bromii and lower levels of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, along with an increased Firmicutes:Bacteroides ratio. Afterward, we exposed obese and lean microbial communities to an apple as a representative complex food matrix, apple pectin as a soluble fiber, and cellulose as an insoluble fiber. Dietary fibers, particularly apple pectin, reduced Acidaminococcus intestini and boosted Megasphaera and Akkermansia in the obese microbial community. Additionally, these fibers altered the production of metabolites, increasing beneficial indole microbial metabolites. Our results underscored the ability of apple and apple pectin to shape the obese gut microbiota. CONCLUSION: We found that the obese microbial community had higher branched-chain amino acid catabolism and hexanoic acid production, potentially impacting energy balance. Apple dietary fibers, especially pectin, influenced the obese microbial community, altering both species and metabolites. Notably, the apple pectin feeding condition affected species like Klebsiella pneumoniae and Bifidobacterium longum. By using genome-scale metabolic modeling, we discovered a mutualistic cross-feeding relationship between Megasphaera sp. MJR8396C and Bifidobacterium adolescentis. This in vitro study suggests that incorporating apple fibers into the diets of obese individuals can help modify the composition of gut bacteria and improve metabolic health. This personalized approach could help mitigate the effects of obesity. Video Abstract.

Heat stress (HS) incidence is associated with the accumulation of reactive substances, which might be associated with bone loss. N-Acetylcysteine (NAC) exhibits strong antioxidants due to its sulfhydryl group and being as the precursor for endogenous glutathione synthesis. Therefore, interplay between oxidative stress and bone turnover of broilers and the effects of dietary NAC inclusion on antioxidant capability and "gut-bone" axis were evaluated during chronic HS. RESULTS: Implementing cyclic chronic HS (34 °C for 7 h/d) evoked reactive oxygen species excessive production and oxidant stress, which was accompanied by compromised tibia mass. The RNA-seq of proximal tibia also revealed the enrichment of oxidation-reduction process and inflammatory outbursts during HS. Although no notable alterations in the growth performance and cecal microbiota were found, the diet contained 2 g/kg NAC enhanced the antioxidant capability of heat-stressed broiler chickens by upregulating the expression of Nrf2 in the ileum, tibia, and bone marrow. Simultaneously, NAC tended to hinder NF-κB pathway activation and decreased the mRNA levels of the proinflammatory cytokines in both the ileum and bone marrow. As a result, NAC suppressed osteoclastogenesis and osteoclast activity, thereby increasing osteocyte-related gene expression. Furthermore, the inclusion of NAC tended to increase the ash content and density of the whole tibia, as well as improve cortical thickness and bone volume of the diaphysis. CONCLUSIONS: These findings HS-mediated outburst of oxidant stress accelerates bone resorption and negatively regulates the bone quality of tibia, which is inhibited by NAC in broilers.

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a global health problem with limited therapeutic options. The biochemical mechanisms that lead to this disorder are not yet fully understood, and in this respect, metabolomics represents a promising approach to decipher metabolic events related to AUD. The plasma metabolome contains a plethora of bioactive molecules that reflects the functional changes in host metabolism but also the impact of the gut microbiome and nutritional habits. METHODS: In this study, we investigated the impact of severe AUD (sAUD), and of a 3-week period of alcohol abstinence, on the blood metabolome (non-targeted LC-MS metabolomics analysis) in 96 sAUD patients hospitalized for alcohol withdrawal. RESULTS: We found that the plasma levels of different lipids ((lyso)phosphatidylcholines, long-chain fatty acids), short-chain fatty acids (i.e. 3-hydroxyvaleric acid) and bile acids were altered in sAUD patients. In addition, several microbial metabolites, including indole-3-propionic acid, p-cresol sulfate, hippuric acid, pyrocatechol sulfate, and metabolites belonging to xanthine class (paraxanthine, theobromine and theophylline) were sensitive to alcohol exposure and alcohol withdrawal. 3-Hydroxyvaleric acid, caffeine metabolites (theobromine, paraxanthine, and theophylline) and microbial metabolites (hippuric acid and pyrocatechol sulfate) were correlated with anxiety, depression and alcohol craving. Metabolomics analysis in postmortem samples of frontal cortex and cerebrospinal fluid of those consuming a high level of alcohol revealed that those metabolites can be found also in brain tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Our data allow the identification of neuroactive metabolites, from interactions between food components and microbiota, which may represent new targets arising in the management of neuropsychiatric diseases such as sAUD. FUNDING: Gut2Behave project was initiated from ERA-NET NEURON network (Joint Transnational Call 2019) and was financed by Academy of Finland, French National Research Agency (ANR-19-NEUR-0003-03) and the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FRS-FNRS; PINT-MULTI R.8013.19, Belgium). Metabolomics analysis of the TSDS samples was supported by grant from the Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies.

In this study, milk, serum, and rumen fluid samples from 40 Holstein dairy cows (on d 56 postpartum) with different rumen pH (2-4 h after morning feeding) were explored to investigate the difference of susceptibility to SARA and the correlation between microbiome, LPS and inflammation. These cows were categorized into low pH (LPH, pH ≤ 6.0, n = 20) and high pH (HPH, pH ≥ 6.5, n = 20) groups. RESULTS: The results showed that LPH group increased the concentrations of total volatile fatty acids, acetate, propionate, butyrate and valerate. However, milk yield and milk compositions were unaffected. Compared to the HPH group, the LPH group increased the concentrations of serum BHBA, NEFA, LPS, HIS, IL-2, IL-6, TNF-α, and MDA, and decreased the concentrations of serum IgA, IgM, IgG, SOD, T-AOC, and mTOR. In addition, the LPH group decreased the copies of Ruminococcus flavefaciens and increased the copies of Fibrobacter succinogenes. Microbial community analysis isupplendicated a significant difference in bacterial composition between the two groups. At the phylum level, Bacteroidota and Firmicutes were enriched in the LPH and HPH groups, respectively. At the genus level, the dominant bacteria in the LPH group were Prevotella. Additionally, the LPH group increased the proportions of Gram-negative phenotypes, potentially pathogenic phenotypes and LPS biosynthesis. The close correlation between two key enzymes for LPS synthesis LpxL and LpxM with rumen pH, inflammatory markers, and microorganisms indicates that low pH may increase the risk of inflammation by facilitating the lysis of Gram-negative bacteria and the release of penta-acylated LPS. Penta-acylated and hexa-acylated LPS may be mainly derived from Prevotella and Succinivibrionaceae_UCG-001, respectively. DISCUSSION: Overall, these results support the notion that transient low pH could reflect the risk of cows suffering from SARA and associated inflammation and is strongly associated with penta-acylated LPS. Our findings provide new insights into ruminant health improvement and disease prevention strategies.

Bile acid species were analyzed in serum and fecal samples from a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy trial at baseline and after 3 and 6 weeks of orally administered colesevelam (1,875 mg twice daily, n = 26) or subcutaneously administered liraglutide (uptitrated by weekly increments of 0.6 mg from 0.6 to 1.8 mg daily, n = 26) in patients with 75 selenium-homotaurocholic acid test-verified, idiopathic, or postcholecystectomy bile acid diarrhea. Fecal microbiota composition was analyzed by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing at the same time points. RESULTS: Colesevelam increased the fecal concentrations of all bile acid species, whereas it decreased serum concentrations of secondary bile acids. Liraglutide induced a small increase in serum unconjugated bile acid concentrations without affecting fecal bile acid concentrations. No changes in fecal microbiota composition were observed with either treatment. DISCUSSION: Colesevelam and liraglutide exhibit distinct effects on serum and fecal bile acid concentrations with colesevelam reducing serum concentrations of secondary bile acids and promoting fecal bile acid excretion, whereas liraglutide enhances serum concentrations of unconjugated bile acids, potentially through deceleration of small intestinal transit time allowing more time for passive absorption of bile acids.

This study monitored changes in the total Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale for IBS score (GSRS-IBS), Irritable Bowel Syndrome Symptom Severity Scale (IBS-SSS), IBS Quality of Life index (IBS-QoL), gut microbiome using 16S rRNA sequencing, and the Visceral Sensitivity Index, as well as a range of biochemical markers, anthropometric parameters, and adverse events. RESULTS: While minimal changes were observed in gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms, the HT-ES1 group showed a significant decrease in total and non-HDL cholesterol compared to the placebo. The intervention group also exhibited a significant increase in the abundance of the genera Faecalibacterium and Anaerobutyricum, both of which were positively correlated with butyrate concentrations. Faecal calprotectin significantly increased over time in the placebo group but remained stable in the HT-ES1 group. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these findings suggest that HT-ES1 may promote gut health by increasing butyrate-producing bacteria in the gut, maintaining normal levels of faecal calprotectin and reducing serum cholesterol.

Male C57BL/6J mice were fed a 20% fructose solution and given 400 mg/kg NR daily by gavage for 10 weeks. RESULTS: The results indicated that NR supplementation significantly reduced the body weight, liver weight, white adipose tissue (WAT) weight, serum, and hepatic lipid levels. NR upregulated the protein expression levels of sirtuin-1 (SIRT1), AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), PR domain containing 16 (PRDM16), uncoupling protein 1 (UCP1), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactiva-tor-1-alpha (PGC-1α), nuclear respiratory factor 1-encoding gene (NRF1), mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM), cluster of differentiation 137 (CD137), transmembrane protein 26 (TMEM26), and T-box 1 (TBX1). Moreover, NR enhanced the Actinobacteria and Enterorhabdus abundance. Spearman's correlation analysis revealed that significant correlations exist between Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Erysipelotrichaceae with browning-related indicators. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, NR could alleviate lipid metabolic abnormalities induced by fructose through activating SIRT1/AMPK-mediated browning of WAT. The mechanism by which NR improves fructose-induced lipid metabolism disorders may also be associated with the modulation of intestinal flora.

Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a metabolic disorder that necessitates dietary restrictions, potentially impacting the composition of gut and oral microbiota. This study aimed to compare the microbiota composition between children with PKU and healthy controls. METHODS: Using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, we analysed microbial communities at six phylogenetic levels. RESULTS: Our findings revealed significant differences in the gut microbiota: Euryarchaeota was more abundant in controls (p = 0.01), while Bacilli and Lactobacillales were higher in PKU children (p = 0.019). Methanobacteriales were significantly elevated in controls (p = 0.01). At the genus and species levels, PKU children had higher Streptococcus and Eubacterium dolichum (p = 0.019, p = 0.015), whereas controls had more Barnesiella, Coprococcus, and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (p = 0.014, p = 0.019, p = 0.014). In the oral microbiota, control children exhibited significantly higher Bacteroidetes (p = 0.032), while PKU children had increased Bacilli and Betaproteobacteria (p = 0.0079, p = 0.016). Streptococcus and Neisseria were more prevalent in PKU (p = 0.0079, p = 0.016). CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that PKU and its dietary management significantly alter the gut and oral microbiota composition. Understanding these microbial shifts could have implications for managing PKU and improving patient outcomes.

Frailty increases the risk of needing nursing care and significantly affects the life and functional prognosis of older individuals. Early detection and tailored interventions are crucial for maintaining and enhancing their life functions. Recognizing distinct clinical phenotypes is essential for devising appropriate interventions. This study aimed to explore diverse frailty phenotypes, focusing on poor nutrition in older Japanese individuals through observational research. METHODS: Twenty-one nursing home residents underwent a comprehensive survey covering physical, blood, dietary, cardiac, cognitive, nutritional, nursing care, frailty, agitated behavior, and gut microbiome assessments (high-throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing). Using clustering analysis with 239 survey items (excluding gut microbiome), participants were classified into subgroups based on clinical phenotypes, and group characteristics were compared through analysis. RESULTS: Individuals with moderate or severe frailty and suspected dementia formed subgroups with distinct clinical phenotypes based on nutritional, defecation, and nursing care statuses. The gut microbiome significantly varied among these groups (p = 0.007), indicating its correlation with changes in clinical phenotype. Nutritional status differences suggested poor nutrition as a differentiating factor in the core clinical phenotype. CONCLUSIONS: This study proposes that the gut microbiome differs based on the clinical phenotype of Japanese older individuals with frailty, and targeted interventions addressing the gut microbiome may contribute to preventing frailty in this population.

Dietary habits are crucial for preventing many diseases, particularly in children and adolescents. Accurate assessment of dietary intake is essential for understanding the relationship between diet and health in these age groups. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the reproducibility and validity of a Spanish version of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) in 150 Spanish children and adolescents aged 10 to 17 using the average of 9 days of 24-h dietary recall (24H-DR) as a reference. METHODS: Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated to asses reproducibility and Spearman/Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated to assess validity and reproducibility. RESULTS: The average ICCs were 0.41 for crude nutrients, 0.31 for food groups, 0.31 for energy-adjusted nutrients, and 0.4 for energy-adjusted food groups. Spearman/Pearson correlation coefficients averaged 0.39 and 0.41 for crude and energy-adjusted nutrients, respectively, and 0.51 and 0.47 for corresponding food groups. Regarding validity, the average correlation coefficient for crude, energy-adjusted, and de-attenuated nutrients was 0.32, 0.50, and 0.50, respectively. The highest crude coefficient was 0.50 for vitamin C and fiber, while the highest energy-adjusted coefficient was 0.76 for protein and carbohydrates. The highest de-attenuated coefficient was 0.72 for vitamin B6. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results suggest that the EPIC FFQ is a valid and reliable instrument for assessing dietary intake in Spanish children and adolescents.

Genetic variants from a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for VK (N = 2138 Europeans) were used as instruments in our two-sample MR study to investigate whether circulating VK levels are causally associated with the risk of T1D in a large European T1D GWAS cohort (18,942 cases/520,580 controls). Through a multivariable MR (MVMR), the effects of both VK and specific gut microbiota on T1D were investigated given that the gut microbiome synthesizes VK. RESULTS: We found that changes in levels of circulating VK did not affect T1D risk in our univariate two-sample MR, but this study had limited power to detect small effects of VK (OR for T1D of less than 0.8). However, our MVMR indicated a suggestive association of VK with the risk of T1D adjusting for two different gut microbiome populations. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, VK levels are unlikely to significantly affect the risk of T1D, but small effects cannot be excluded, and the role of gut microbiome in this association should be further investigated.

Small bowel dysbiosis (SBD) is a frequent finding in subjects with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). The sunflower lecithin (phytosome) formulation of Curcuma longa and Boswellia serrata demonstrated beneficial effects on intestinal microbiota. This study aimed to evaluate the impact of a lecithin-based delivery formulation of Curcuma longa and Boswellia serrata extracts (CUBO) on SBD in IBS subjects. SUBJECTS: Forty-nine adult subjects with IBS and SBD were randomly supplemented for 30 days with CUBO and a low-FODMAP diet (LFD) (intervention) or with LFD and placebo (control group). RESULTS: The intervention group showed a significant reduction in urinary indican (p < 0.001), which was the marker of SBD, and of abdominal bloating (p < 0.001) and abdominal pain (p < 0.001). The pre-post control group analysis did not evidence significant differences. The comparison between the two groups (net effect in intervention minus control subjects) showed that the changes differ significantly for urinary indican p < 0.001 (-42.88; 95% CI: -62.04 to -23.72), abdominal bloating p < 0.001 (-1.50; 95% CI: -1.93 to -1.07), and abdominal pain p < 0.001 (-2.37; 95% CI: -3.61 to -1.13) and for the global assessment of efficacy (p < 0.001). The efficacy was 20% greater in males than in females. CONCLUSIONS: In IBS subjects, the intervention with CUBO and LFD shows a significantly higher reduction in SBD, abdominal pain, and bloating compared to LFD and placebo. Additional research is needed to confirm these data.

Proanthocyanidins (PACs) from black soybean seed coat have antioxidant and anti-tumorigenic properties. We investigated the anti-tumor properties and mechanisms of action of PACs on colorectal cancer (CRC). METHODS: We fed the APCmin/+ mice, which are highly susceptible to spontaneous intestinal adenoma formation, diets supplemented with or without PACs for 7 weeks and assessed adverse effects, the number and size of intestinal polyps, and the expression of pro- and anti-proliferative proteins in the intestine. The mouse gut microbiome composition was analyzed, and the concentrations of gut short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were quantified. We also compared CRC incidence in Tamba in Japan, where black soybean is consumed frequently, with that in the rest of Japan. RESULTS: The number and size of intestinal polyps notably decreased in the PAC-fed mice. Compared with control mice, the PAC-fed mice showed lower expression of proliferation markers proliferating cell nuclear antigen and β catenin and a higher expression of the anti-inflammatory protein oligomeric mucus gel-forming. PAC supplementation increased the prevalence and concentrations of beneficial gut microbes and SCFAs, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Diet supplemented with black soybean-derived PACs could prevent CRC development in mice through gut microbiome remodeling. Regions consuming black soybeans have low CRC incidence. Notably, the incidence of CRC, breast cancer, and liver cancer was significantly lower in Tamba than in the rest of Hyogo Prefecture or Japan. Future studies should delineate the mechanisms underlying the CRC-protective effects of PACs. Nevertheless, our results demonstrate the potential of including PACs in dietary recommendations for cancer prevention.

Codonopsis pilosula is a traditional herb widely used in Asian countries. As regulatory institutions increasingly acknowledge its medicinal and food-related characteristics, the attention from scholars is expected to increase rapidly. However, an overview and reports on research focus on this promising herb are currently lacking. Therefore, the objective of this study was to fill this knowledge gap by conducting a systematic review of relevant literature to explore the developing history and research focus on C. pilosula. This research is of significant importance in gaining a deeper understanding of the potential benefits and application areas of C. pilosula. METHOD: The output, institutions, countries, authors, highly cited publications, frontier focus and funding agencies of C. pilosula were analyzed using VOSviewer, CiteSpace, and COOC software. RESULTS: The development of C. pilosula experienced 3 stages: initial stage (1979-2002), fast stage (2003-2012), and explosive stage (2013-present), with each stage showing linear growth. Worldwide attention from 1292 institutions in 27 countries have been paid, with China leading in output and collaboration. Lanzhou University in China contributed most publications with Fangdi Hu as a core specialist facilitating collaborations in agricultural and pharmacological research. A stable cooperation network has formed among researchers from different fields, focusing on pharmacological activity, chemical constituents, quality control, and medication rules. The research focus updated timely with new scientific frontiers occur. Medication rules, data mining, molecular docking, traditional Chinese medicine, gut microbiota, and polysaccharide are frontier focus presently and in the near future. Significant attention and funding have been provided by the national and local government of Gansu province in China. CONCLUSION: Research on C. pilosula is thriving, particularly in China, with a promising future in traditional Chinese medicine and pharmacology. This study provides valuable insights for future research directions and contributes to the effective development of C. pilosula.

The gut-microbiome-brain axis (GMBA) implies the connection between inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). We aimed to comprehensively explore the relation between IBD (and its subtypes) and AD, early-onset AD (EOAD) and late-onset AD (LOAD) from a genetic pleiotropy perspective. METHODS: Relying on summary statistics (N = 472,868 for AD, 185,204 for EOAD, 191,061 for LOAD, 59,957 for IBD, 45,975 for CD, and 40,266 for UC), we first performed Mendelian Randomization to examine the causal association between IBD and AD by leveraging vertical pleiotropy. Then, we estimated global and local genetic correlations, followed by cross-trait association analysis to identify SNPs and genes with horizontal pleiotropy. Particularly, we utilized multi-trait colocalization analysis to assess the role of microbes in the common genetic etiology underlying the two types of diseases. Finally, we conducted functional enrichment analysis for pleiotropic genes. RESULTS: We discovered suggestively causal relations between IBD (and its subtypes) and EOAD (ORIBD = 1.06 [1.01-1.11], ORCD = 1.05 [1.01-1.10], ORUC = 1.08 [1.01-1.15]) as well as between UC and LOAD (OR = 1.04 [1.01-1.08]), and discovered 44 local regions showing suggestively significant genetic correlations between IBD (and its subtypes) and AD (and EODA and LOAD). We further detected substantial genetic overlap, as characterized by 182 AD-associated, 3 EOAD-associated and 51 LOAD-associated pleiotropic SNPs as well as 291 pleiotropic genes. Pleiotropic genes more likely enriched in the GMBA-relevant tissues such as brain, intestine and esophagus. Moreover, we identified three microorganisms related to these disease pairs, including the Catenibacterium, Clostridia, and Prevotella species. CONCLUSION: The suggestively causal associations and shared genetic basis between IBD and its subtypes with AD, EOAD and LOAD may commonly drive their co-occurrence, and gut microbes might partly explain the shared genetic etiology. Further studies are warranted to elaborate the possibly biological mechanisms underlying the two types of diseases.

Advances in metagenome sequencing data continue to enable new methods for analyzing biological systems. When handling microbial profile data, metagenome sequencing has proven to be far more comprehensive than traditional methods such as 16s rRNA data, which rely on partial sequences. Microbial community profiling can be used to obtain key biological insights that pave the way for more accurate understanding of complex systems that are critical for advancing biomedical research and healthcare. However, such attempts have mostly used partial or incomplete data to accurately capture those associations. METHODS: This study introduces a novel computational approach for the identification of co-occurring microbial communities using the abundance and functional roles of species-level microbiome data. The proposed approach is then used to identify signature pathways associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Furthermore, we developed a computational pipeline to identify microbial species co-occurrences from metagenome data at various granularity levels. RESULTS: When comparing the IBD group to a control group, we show that certain co-occurring communities of species are enriched for potential pathways. We also show that the identified co-occurring microbial species operate as a community to facilitate pathway enrichment. CONCLUSIONS: The obtained findings suggest that the proposed network model, along with the computational pipeline, provide a valuable analytical tool to analyze complex biological systems and extract pathway signatures that can be used to diagnose certain health conditions.

Vestimentiferan tubeworms are deep-sea colonizers, in which chemoautotrophic symbiosis was first observed. These animals are gutless and depend on endosymbiotic bacteria for organic compound synthesis and nutrition supply. Taxonomically, vestimentiferans belong to Siboglinidae and Annelida. Compared with other siboglinids, vestimentiferans are distinguished by high tolerance of the prevailing hydrogen sulfide in hydrothermal vents, rapid growth in local habitats, and a physical structure consisting of a thick chitinous tube. The metabolic mechanisms contributing to these features remain elusive. RESULTS: Comparative genomics revealed that unlike other annelids, vestimentiferans possessed trehaloneogenesis and lacked gluconeogenesis. Transcriptome and metabolome analyses detected the expression of trehalose-6-phosphate synthase/phosphatase (TPSP), the key enzyme of trehaloneogenesis, and trehalose production in vestimentiferan tissues. In addition to trehaloneogenesis, glycogen biosynthesis evidenced by packed glycogen granules was also found in vestimentiferan symbionts, but not in other Siboglinidae symbionts. Data mining and analyses of invertebrate TPSP revealed that the TPSP in Vestimentifera, as well as Cnidaria, Rotifera, Urochordata, and Cephalochordata, likely originated from Arthropoda, possibly as a result of transposon-mediated inter-phyla gene transfer. CONCLUSION: This study indicates a critical role of bacterial glycogen biosynthesis in the highly efficient symbiont - vestimentiferan cooperation. This study provides a new perspective for understanding the environmental adaptation strategies of vestimentiferans and adds new insights into the mechanism of metabolic evolution in Metazoa. Video Abstract.

Shallow, tropical coral reefs face compounding threats from climate change, habitat degradation due to coastal development and pollution, impacts from storms and sea-level rise, and pulse disturbances like blast fishing, mining, dredging, and ship groundings that reduce reef height and complexity. One approach toward restoring coral reef physical structure from such impacts is deploying built structures of artificial, natural, or hybrid (both artificial and natural) origin. Built structures range from designed modules and repurposed materials to underwater sculptures and intentionally placed natural rocks. Restoration practitioners and coastal managers increasingly consider incorporating - and in many cases have already begun to incorporate - built structures into coral reef-related applications, yet synthesized evidence on the ecological (coral-related; e.g., coral growth, coral survival) and physical performance of built structures in coral ecosystems across a variety of contexts (e.g., restoration, coastal protection, mitigation, tourism) is not readily available to guide decisions. To help fill this gap and inform management decisions, we systematically mapped the global distribution and abundance of published evidence on the ecological (coral-related) and physical performance of built structure interventions in shallow (≤ 30 m), tropical (35°N to 35°S) coral ecosystems. METHODS: To identify potentially relevant articles, we used predefined and tested strategies to search two indexing platforms, one bibliographic database, two open discovery citation indexes, one web-based search engine, one novel literature discovery tool, 19 organizational websites, and information requested from stakeholders. Discovered articles were screened according to preset eligibility criteria first by title and abstract and second by full text. Articles included during full text screening were coded to extract metadata following a predefined framework. We analyzed and visualized the evidence base to answer our primary and secondary research questions and to identify knowledge clusters and gaps. Findings are reported in a narrative synthesis. RESULTS: Our search discovered > 20,000 potentially relevant unique articles, of which 258 were included in the systematic map. The evidence base spans 50 countries, and the volume of evidence increased over the past five decades. Built structures were most commonly installed for coral restoration (61%) or coastal protection (12%). Structures were predominately characterized as artificial (87%), with fewer hybrid or natural interventions. Evidence clusters existed for intentionally designed artificial structures and outcomes associated with coral-related ecological performance, including coral mortality, growth, recruitment, cover, and diversity. Pronounced evidence gaps occurred at the intersection of several ecological coral-related performance outcomes (e.g., connectivity, microbiome) across all types of built structures; gaps also existed across most ecological coral-related outcomes for artwork and repurposed artificial structures. Physical performance of built structures was most frequently evaluated for outcomes related to waves (n = 14) and sediment and morphology (n = 11) with pervasive evidence gaps across other outcomes like storm surge and water level. CONCLUSIONS: While the systematic map highlighted several evidence clusters, it also revealed pronounced evidence gaps surrounding the coral-related ecological and physical performance of built structures in coral ecosystems. The compiled evidence base will help inform policy, management, and future consideration of built structures in reef-related applications, including habitat restoration, environmental mitigation, and coastal protection. Map findings also point to promising future research avenues, such as investigating seascape-scale ecological effects of and the physical performance of built structures.

To address this scholarly void, the present study employs a suite of bibliometric tools including online platforms, CiteSpace and VOSviewer to scrutinize the pertinent literature in the realm of gastrointestinal microbiota and bone metabolism. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Examination of the temporal distribution of publications spanning from 2000 to 2023 reveals a discernible upward trajectory in research output, characterized by an average annual growth rate of 19.2%. Notably, China and the United States emerge as primary contributors. Predominant among contributing institutions are Emory University, Harvard University, and the University of California. Pacifici R from Emory University contributed the most research with 15 publications. In the realm of academic journals, Nutrients emerges as the foremost publisher, followed closely by Frontiers in Microbiology and PLOS One. And PLOS One attains the highest average citations of 32.48. Analysis of highly cited papers underscores a burgeoning interest in the therapeutic potential of probiotics or probiotic blends in modulating bone metabolism by augmenting host immune responses. Notably, significant research attention has coalesced around the therapeutic interventions of probiotics, particularly Lactobacillus reuteri, in osteoporosis, as well as the role of gastrointestinal microbiota in the etiology and progression of osteoarthritis. Keyword analysis reveals prevalent terms including gut microbiota, osteoporosis, bone density, probiotics, inflammation, SCFAs, metabolism, osteoarthritis, calcium absorption, obesity, double-blind, prebiotics, mechanisms, postmenopausal women, supplementation, risk factors, oxidative stress, and immune system. Future research endeavors warrant a nuanced exploration of topics such as inflammation, obesity, SCFAs, postmenopausal osteoporosis, skeletal muscle, oxidative stress, double-blind trials, and pathogenic mechanisms. In summary, this study presents a comprehensive bibliometric analysis of global research on the interplay between gastrointestinal microbiota and bone metabolism, offering valuable insights for scholars, particularly nascent researchers, embarking on analogous investigations within this domain.

Microbial secondary metabolites play a crucial role in the intricate interactions within the natural environment. Among these metabolites, ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides (RiPPs) are becoming a promising source of therapeutic agents due to their structural diversity and functional versatility. However, their biosynthetic capacity and ecological functions remain largely underexplored. RESULTS: Here, we aim to explore the biosynthetic profile of RiPPs and their potential roles in the interactions between microbes and viruses in the ocean, which encompasses a vast diversity of unique biomes that are rich in interactions and remains chemically underexplored. We first developed TrRiPP to identify RiPPs from ocean metagenomes, a deep learning method that detects RiPP precursors in a hallmark gene-independent manner to overcome the limitations of classic methods in processing highly fragmented metagenomic data. Applying this method to metagenomes from the global ocean microbiome, we uncover a diverse array of previously uncharacterized putative RiPP families with great novelty and diversity. Through correlation analysis based on metatranscriptomic data, we observed a high prevalence of antiphage defense-related and phage-related protein families that were co-expressed with RiPP families. Based on this putative association between RiPPs and phage infection, we constructed an Ocean Virus Database (OVD) and established a RiPP-involving host-phage interaction network through host prediction and co-expression analysis, revealing complex connectivities linking RiPP-encoding prokaryotes, RiPP families, viral protein families, and phages. These findings highlight the potential of RiPP families involved in prokaryote-phage interactions and coevolution, providing insights into their ecological functions in the ocean microbiome. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides a systematic investigation of the biosynthetic potential of RiPPs from the ocean microbiome at a global scale, shedding light on the essential insights into the ecological functions of RiPPs in prokaryote-phage interactions through the integration of deep learning approaches, metatranscriptomic data, and host-phage connectivity. This study serves as a valuable example of exploring the ecological functions of bacterial secondary metabolites, particularly their associations with unexplored microbial interactions. Video Abstract.

Microbial functioning on marine plastic surfaces has been poorly documented, especially within cold climates where temperature likely impacts microbial activity and the presence of hydrocarbonoclastic microorganisms. To date, only two studies have used metaproteomics to unravel microbial genotype-phenotype linkages in the marine 'plastisphere', and these have revealed the dominance of photosynthetic microorganisms within warm climates. Advancing the functional representation of the marine plastisphere is vital for the development of specific databases cataloging the functional diversity of the associated microorganisms and their peptide and protein sequences, to fuel biotechnological discoveries. Here, we provide a comprehensive assessment for plastisphere metaproteomics, using multi-omics and data mining on thin plastic biofilms to provide unique insights into plastisphere metabolism. Our robust experimental design assessed DNA/protein co-extraction and cell lysis strategies, proteomics workflows, and diverse protein search databases, to resolve the active plastisphere taxa and their expressed functions from an understudied cold environment. RESULTS: For the first time, we demonstrate the predominance and activity of hydrocarbonoclastic genera (Psychrobacter, Flavobacterium, Pseudomonas) within a primarily heterotrophic plastisphere. Correspondingly, oxidative phosphorylation, the citrate cycle, and carbohydrate metabolism were the dominant pathways expressed. Quorum sensing and toxin-associated proteins of Streptomyces were indicative of inter-community interactions. Stress response proteins expressed by Psychrobacter, Planococcus, and Pseudoalteromonas and proteins mediating xenobiotics degradation in Psychrobacter and Pseudoalteromonas suggested phenotypic adaptations to the toxic chemical microenvironment of the plastisphere. Interestingly, a targeted search strategy identified plastic biodegradation enzymes, including polyamidase, hydrolase, and depolymerase, expressed by rare taxa. The expression of virulence factors and mechanisms of antimicrobial resistance suggested pathogenic genera were active, despite representing a minor component of the plastisphere community. CONCLUSION: Our study addresses a critical gap in understanding the functioning of the marine plastisphere, contributing new insights into the function and ecology of an emerging and important microbial niche. Our comprehensive multi-omics and comparative metaproteomics experimental design enhances biological interpretations to provide new perspectives on microorganisms of potential biotechnological significance beyond biodegradation and to improve the assessment of the risks associated with microorganisms colonizing marine plastic pollution. Video Abstract.

Base Mine Lake (BML) is the first full-scale end pit lake for the oil sands mining industry in Canada. BML sequesters oil sands tailings under a freshwater cap and is intended to develop into a functional ecosystem that can be integrated into the local watershed. The first stage of successful reclamation requires the development of a phytoplankton community supporting a typical boreal lake food web. To assess the diversity and dynamics of the phytoplankton community in BML at this reclamation stage and to set a baseline for future monitoring, we examined the phytoplankton community in BML from 2016 through 2021 using molecular methods (targeting the 23S, 18S, and 16S rRNA genes) and microscopic methods. Nearby water bodies were used as controls for a freshwater environment and an active tailings pond. RESULTS: The phytoplankton community was made up of diverse bacteria and eukaryotes typical of a boreal lake. Microscopy and molecular data both identified a phytoplankton community comparable at the phylum level to that of natural boreal lakes, dominated by Chlorophyta, Cryptophyta, and Cyanophyta, with some Bacillariophyta, Ochrophyta, and Euglenophyta. Although many of the same genera were prominent in both BML and the control freshwater reservoir, there were differences at the species or ASV level. Total diversity in BML was also consistently lower than the control freshwater site, but consistently higher than the control tailings pond. The phytoplankton community composition in BML changed over the 5-year study period. Some taxa present in 2016-2019 (e.g., Choricystis) were no longer detected in 2021, while some dinophytes and haptophytes became detectable in small quantities starting in 2019-2021. Different quantification methods (qPCR analysis of 23S rRNA genes, and microscopic estimates of populations and total biomass) did not show a consistent directional trend in total phytoplankton over the 5-year study, nor was there any consistent increase in phytoplankton species diversity. The 5-year period was likely an insufficient time frame for detecting community trends, as phytoplankton communities are highly variable at the genus and species level. CONCLUSIONS: BML supports a phytoplankton community composition somewhat unique from control sites (active tailings and freshwater lake) and is still changing over time. However, the most abundant genera are typical of natural boreal lakes and have the potential to support a complex aquatic food web, with many of its identified major phytoplankton constituents known to be primary producers in boreal lake environments.

The healthy as well as dysbiotic state of an ecosystem like human body is known to be influenced not only by the presence of the bacterial groups in it, but also with respect to the associations within themselves. Evidence reported in biomedical text serves as a reliable source for identifying and ascertaining such inter bacterial associations. However, the complexity of the reported text as well as the ever-increasing volume of information necessitates development of methods for automated and accurate extraction of such knowledge. METHODS: A BioBERT (biomedical domain specific language model) based information extraction model for bacterial associations is presented that utilizes learning patterns from other publicly available datasets. Additionally, a specialized sentence corpus has been developed to significantly improve the prediction accuracy of the 'transfer learned' model using a fine-tuning approach. RESULTS: The final model was seen to outperform all other variations (non-transfer learned and non-fine-tuned models) as well as models trained on BioGPT (a domain trained Generative Pre-trained Transformer). To further demonstrate the utility, a case study was performed using bacterial association network data obtained from experimental studies. CONCLUSION: This study attempts to demonstrate the applicability of transfer learning in a niche field of life sciences where understanding of inter bacterial relationships is crucial to obtain meaningful insights in comprehending microbial community structures across different ecosystems. The study further discusses how such a model can be further improved by fine tuning using limited training data. The results presented and the datasets made available are expected to be a valuable addition in the field of medical informatics and bioinformatics.

The thus devised ketamine pathway 'KetPath' knowledge graph comprises five parts: (i) manually curated pathway facts from images; (ii) recognized named entities in biomedical texts; (iii) identified relations between named entities; (iv) our previously constructed microbiota and pre-/probiotics knowledge bases; and (v) multiple community-accepted public databases. We first assessed the performance of automated extraction of relations between named entities using the specially designed state-of-the-art tool BioKetBERT. The query results show that we can retrieve drug actions, pathway relations, co-occurring entities, and their relations. These results uncover several biological findings, such as various gut microbes leading to increased expression of BDNF, which may contribute to the sustained antidepressant effects of ketamine. We envision that the methods and findings from this research will aid researchers who wish to integrate and query data and knowledge from multiple biomedical databases and literature simultaneously. AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Data and query protocols are available in the KetPath repository at https://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8398941 and https://github.com/tingcosmos/KetPath.

Cancer screening and early detection greatly increase the chances of successful treatment. However, most cancer types lack effective early screening biomarkers. In recent years, natural language processing (NLP)-based text-mining methods have proven effective in searching the scientific literature and identifying promising associations between potential biomarkers and disease, but unfortunately few are widely used. METHODS: In this study, we used an NLP-enabled text-mining system, MarkerGenie, to identify potential stool bacterial markers for early detection and screening of colorectal cancer. After filtering markers based on text-mining results, we validated bacterial markers using multiplex digital droplet polymerase chain reaction (ddPCR). Classifiers were built based on ddPCR results, and sensitivity, specificity, and area under the curve (AUC) were used to evaluate the performance. RESULTS: A total of 7 of the 14 bacterial markers showed significantly increased abundance in the stools of colorectal cancer patients. A five-bacteria classifier for colorectal cancer diagnosis was built, and achieved an AUC of 0.852, with a sensitivity of 0.692 and specificity of 0.935. When combined with the fecal immunochemical test (FIT), our classifier achieved an AUC of 0.959 and increased the sensitivity of FIT (0.929 vs. 0.872) at a specificity of 0.900. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a valuable case example of the use of NLP-based marker mining for biomarker identification.

A total of 118 gut microbiota samples from three groups of 43 BA patients, 33 disease controls (DC) with other cholestatic diseases and 42 healthy controls (HC), were analyzed by deep mining of public data. Subsequently, a total of 23 fecal samples from three groups of clinically collected patients (11 BA, 6 DC and 6 HC) were sequenced for 16S rRNA gene amplification and analyzed for serum butyrate (BU) level by liquid chromatography. RESULTS: Taxonomic analysis revealed significant differences in the composition of the intestinal microbiota between BA patients and controls, with a reduction in diversity and a higher abundance of Proteobacteria, Streptococcus and Lactobacillus in the BA group. Database and clinical data analyses concluded that Streptococcus/Bacteroides (AUC = 0.9035, 95% CI 0.8347-0.9722, P < 0.0001) or Streptococcus/Eggerthella (AUC = 0.8333, 95% CI 0.6340-1.000, P = 0.027) was the best microbiota to differentiate between BA and DC. Serum butyrate levels were low in the BA and DC groups and differed from the HC group (P = 0.01, P = 0.04). Butyrate levels in BA were negatively correlated with jaundice clearance and cholangitis, but not statistically significant. CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals changes in the composition of the gut microbiota in BA, especially the butyrate-producing microbiota, and suggests the potential for using gut microbiota as a noninvasive diagnostic benefit for BA. Low levels of serum butyrate in BA may indicate a poor prognosis.

Eight databases were systematically searched through May 2022 to identify clinical studies on TCM for hepatitis B cirrhosis. We analyzed the frequency, properties, flavors, and meridians of Chinese medicinals based on TCM theories and utilized the Apriori algorithm to identify the core botanical drugs for cirrhosis treatment. Cross-database comparison elucidated gut microbes sharing therapeutic targets with these core botanical drugs. MR analysis assessed consistency between gut microbiota causally implicated in cirrhosis and microbiota sharing therapeutic targets with key botanicals. RESULTS: Our findings revealed differences between the Chinese medicinals used for compensated and decompensated cirrhosis, with distinct frequency, dosage, properties, flavors, and meridian based on TCM theory. Angelicae Sinensis Radix, Salviae Miltiorrhizae Radix Et Rhizoma, Poria, Paeoniae Radix Alba, Astragali Radix, Atrctylodis Macrocephalae Rhizoma were the main botanicals. Botanical drugs and gut microbiota target MAPK1, VEGFA, STAT3, AKT1, RELA, JUN, and ESR1 in the treatment of hepatitis B cirrhosis, and their combined use has shown promise for cirrhosis treatment. MR analysis demonstrated a positive correlation between increased ClostridialesvadinBB60 and Ruminococcustorques abundance and heightened cirrhosis risk. In contrast, Eubacteriumruminantium, Lachnospiraceae, Eubacteriumnodatum, RuminococcaceaeNK4A214, Veillonella, and RuminococcaceaeUCG002 associated with reduced cirrhosis risk. Notably, Lachnospiraceae shares key therapeutic targets with core botanicals, which can treat cirrhosis at a causal level. CONCLUSION: We identified 6 core botanical drugs for managing compensated and decompensated hepatitis B cirrhosis, despite slight prescription differences. The core botanical drugs affected cirrhosis through multiple targets and pathways. The shared biological effects between botanicals and protective gut microbiota offer a potential explanation for the therapeutic benefits of these key herbal components in treating cirrhosis. Elucidating these mechanisms provides crucial insights to inform new drug development and optimize clinical therapy for hepatitis B cirrhosis.

The Amazon Region hosts invaluable and unique biodiversity as well as mineral resources. Consequently, large illegal and artisanal gold mining areas exist in indigenous territories. Mercury has been used in gold mining, and some has been released into the environment and atmosphere, primarily affecting indigenous people such as the Yanomami. In addition, other heavy metals have been associated with gold mining and other metal-dispersing activities in the region. OBJECTIVE: Investigate the gut microbiome of two semi-isolated groups from the Amazon, focusing on metal resistance. METHODS: Metagenomic data from the Yanomami and Tunapuco gut microbiome were assembled into contigs, and their putative proteins were searched against a database of metal resistance proteins. FINDINGS: Proteins associated with mercury resistance were exclusive in the Yanomami, while proteins associated with silver resistance were exclusive in the Tunapuco. Both groups share 77 non-redundant metal resistance (MR) proteins, mostly associated with multi-MR and operons with potential resistance to arsenic, nickel, zinc, copper, copper/silver, and cobalt/nickel. Although both groups harbour operons related to copper resistance, only the Tunapuco group had the pco operon. CONCLUSION: The Yanomami and Tunapuco gut microbiome shows that these people have been exposed directly or indirectly to distinct scenarios concerning heavy metals.

Identification of pathogenic bacteria from clinical specimens and evaluating their antimicrobial resistance (AMR) are laborious tasks that involve in vitro cultivation, isolation, and susceptibility testing. Recently, a number of methods have been developed that use machine learning algorithms applied to the whole-genome sequencing data of isolates to approach this problem. However, making AMR assessments from more easily available metagenomic sequencing data remains a big challenge. RESULTS: We present the Metagenomic Sequencing to Antimicrobial Resistance (MGS2AMR) pipeline, which detects antibiotic resistance genes (ARG) and their possible organism of origin within a sequenced metagenomics sample. This in silico method allows for the evaluation of bacterial AMR directly from clinical specimens, such as stool samples. We have developed two new algorithms to optimize and annotate the genomic assembly paths within the raw Graphical Fragment Assembly (GFA): the GFA Linear Optimal Path through seed segments (GLOPS) algorithm and the Adapted Dijkstra Algorithm for GFA (ADAG). These novel algorithms improve the sensitivity of ARG detection and aid in species annotation. Tests based on 1200 microbiome samples show a high ARG recall rate and correct assignment of the ARG origin. The MGS2AMR output can further be used in many downstream applications, such as evaluating AMR to specific antibiotics in samples from emerging intestinal infections. We demonstrate that the MGS2AMR-derived data is as informative for the entailing prediction models as the whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data. The performance of these models is on par with our previously published method (WGS2AMR), which is based on the sequencing data of bacterial isolates. CONCLUSIONS: MGS2AMR can provide researchers with valuable insights into the AMR content of microbiome environments and may potentially improve patient care by providing faster quantification of resistance against specific antibiotics, thereby reducing the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics. The presented pipeline also has potential applications in other metagenome analyses focused on the defined sets of genes. Video Abstract.

The gut microbiota play important roles in host adaptation and evolution, but are understudied in natural population of wild mammals. To address host adaptive evolution and improve conservation efforts of threatened mammals from a metagenomic perspective, we established a high-quality gut microbiome catalog of the giant panda (pandaGUT) to resolve the microbiome diversity, functional, and resistome landscapes using approximately 7 Tbp of long- and short-read sequencing data from 439 stool samples. RESULTS: The pandaGUT catalog comprises 820 metagenome-assembled genomes, including 40 complete closed genomes, and 64.5% of which belong to species that have not been previously reported, greatly expanding the coverage of most prokaryotic lineages. The catalog contains 2.37 million unique genes, with 74.8% possessing complete open read frames, facilitating future mining of microbial functional potential. We identified three microbial enterotypes across wild and captive panda populations characterized by Clostridium, Pseudomonas, and Escherichia, respectively. We found that wild pandas exhibited host genetic-specific microbial structures and functions, suggesting host-gut microbiota phylosymbiosis, while the captive cohorts encoded more multi-drug resistance genes. CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides largely untapped resources for biochemical and biotechnological applications as well as potential intervention avenues via the rational manipulation of microbial diversity and reducing antibiotic usage for future conservation management of wildlife. Video Abstract.

The current study aims to examine association of dietary live microbes and nondietary prebiotic/probiotic intake with cognitive function among older U.S. adults, examining heterogeneity across demographic characteristics and diseases. METHODS: Participants from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 2011-2014 cycles were selected and administered 3 cognitive function tests: the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease Word Learning subtest (CERAD W-L, including immediate [CERAD-IRT] and delayed [CERAD-DRT] memory), the Animal Fluency Test (AFT), and the Digit Symbol Substitution Test (DSST). Test-specific and global cognition z-score was created. Based on their estimated dietary live microbes intake, participants were categorized into three groups: low, medium, and high. Text mining was employed to identify nondietary prebiotic/probiotic usage by examining the names and ingredients of dietary supplements or drugs. RESULTS: Participants in the medium (including AFT) and high (including global cognition, AFT, DSST, and CERAD-IRT) dietary live microbes intake group had significantly higher z-score of cognitive function compared to those in the low intake group. Among participants with cardiovascular disease history, nondietary prebiotic intake was associated with higher z-score in global cognition and CERAD-DRT compared to those who did not consume prebiotic. Additionally, probiotic intake was linked to higher z-score in global cognition, AFT, and DSST, particularly in participants with diabetes mellitus or hypertension. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the intake of dietary live microbes and nondietary probiotic/prebiotic was associated with better cognitive function in older adults, particularly in specific disease states.

The growing recognition of the microbiome's impact on human health and well-being has prompted extensive research into discovering the links between microbiome dysbiosis and disease (healthy) states. However, this valuable information is scattered in unstructured form within biomedical literature. The structured extraction and qualification of microbe-disease interactions are important. In parallel, recent advancements in deep-learning-based natural language processing algorithms have revolutionized language-related tasks such as ours. This study aims to leverage state-of-the-art deep-learning language models to extract microbe-disease relationships from biomedical literature. RESULTS: In this study, we first evaluate multiple pre-trained large language models within a zero-shot or few-shot learning context. In this setting, the models performed poorly out of the box, emphasizing the need for domain-specific fine-tuning of these language models. Subsequently, we fine-tune multiple language models (specifically, GPT-3, BioGPT, BioMedLM, BERT, BioMegatron, PubMedBERT, BioClinicalBERT, and BioLinkBERT) using labeled training data and evaluate their performance. Our experimental results demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of these fine-tuned models ( specifically GPT-3, BioMedLM, and BioLinkBERT), achieving an average F1 score, precision, and recall of over [Formula: see text] compared to the previous best of 0.74. CONCLUSION: Overall, this study establishes that pre-trained language models excel as transfer learners when fine-tuned with domain and problem-specific data, enabling them to achieve state-of-the-art results even with limited training data for extracting microbiome-disease interactions from scientific publications.

Increasing evidence indicates that metabolites are closely related to human diseases. Identifying disease-related metabolites is especially important for the diagnosis and treatment of disease. Previous works have mainly focused on the global topological information of metabolite and disease similarity networks. However, the local tiny structure of metabolites and diseases may have been ignored, leading to insufficiency and inaccuracy in the latent metabolite-disease interaction mining. METHODS: To solve the aforementioned problem, we propose a novel metabolite-disease interaction prediction method with logical matrix factorization and local nearest neighbor constraints (LMFLNC). First, the algorithm constructs metabolite-metabolite and disease-disease similarity networks by integrating multi-source heterogeneous microbiome data. Then, the local spectral matrices based on these two networks are established and used as the input of the model, together with the known metabolite-disease interaction network. Finally, the probability of metabolite-disease interaction is calculated according to the learned latent representations of metabolites and diseases. RESULTS: Extensive experiments on the metabolite-disease interaction data were conducted. The results show that the proposed LMFLNC method outperformed the second-best algorithm by 5.28 and 5.61% in the AUPR and F1, respectively. The LMFLNC method also exhibited several potential metabolite-disease interactions, such as "Cortisol" (HMDB0000063), relating to "21-Hydroxylase deficiency," and "3-Hydroxybutyric acid" (HMDB0000011) and "Acetoacetic acid" (HMDB0000060), both relating to "3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency." CONCLUSION: The proposed LMFLNC method can well preserve the geometrical structure of original data and can thus effectively predict the underlying associations between metabolites and diseases. The experimental results show its effectiveness in metabolite-disease interaction prediction.

Our knowledge about the ecological role of bacterial antimicrobial peptides (bacteriocins) in the human gut is limited, particularly in relation to their role in the diversification of the gut microbiota during early life. The aim of this paper was therefore to address associations between bacteriocins and bacterial diversity in the human gut microbiota. To investigate this, we did an extensive screening of 2564 healthy human gut metagenomes for the presence of predicted bacteriocin-encoding genes, comparing bacteriocin gene presence to strain diversity and age. RESULTS: We found that the abundance of bacteriocin genes was significantly higher in infant-like metagenomes (< 2 years) compared to adult-like metagenomes (2-107 years). By comparing infant-like metagenomes with and without a given bacteriocin, we found that bacteriocin presence was associated with increased strain diversities. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that bacteriocins may play a role in the strain diversification during the infant gut microbiota establishment.

Azo dyes are used in textiles and leather clothing. Human exposure can occur from wearing textiles containing azo dyes. Since the body's enzymes and microbiome can cleave azo dyes, potentially resulting in mutagenic or carcinogenic metabolites, there is also an indirect health concern on the parent compounds. While several hazardous azo dyes are banned, many more are still in use that have not been evaluated systematically for potential health concerns. This systematic evidence map (SEM) aims to compile and categorize the available toxicological evidence on the potential human health risks of a set of 30 market-relevant azo dyes. METHODS: Peer-reviewed and gray literature was searched and over 20,000 studies were identified. These were filtered using Sciome Workbench for Interactive computer-Facilitated Text-mining (SWIFT) Review software with evidence stream tags (human, animal, in vitro) yielding 12,800 unique records. SWIFT Active (a machine-learning software) further facilitated title/abstract screening. DistillerSR software was used for additional title/abstract, full-text screening, and data extraction. RESULTS: 187 studies were identified that met populations, exposures, comparators, and outcomes (PECO) criteria. From this pool, 54 human, 78 animal, and 61 genotoxicity studies were extracted into a literature inventory. Toxicological evidence was abundant for three azo dyes (also used as food additives) and sparse for five of the remaining 27 compounds. Complementary search in ECHA's REACH database for summaries of unpublished study reports revealed evidence for all 30 dyes. The question arose of how this information can be fed into an SEM process. Proper identification of prioritized dyes from various databases (including U.S. EPA's CompTox Chemicals Dashboard) turned out to be a challenge. Evidence compiled by this SEM project can be evaluated for subsequent use in problem formulation efforts to inform potential regulatory needs and prepare for a more efficient and targeted evaluation in the future for human health assessments.

Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) contamination has been a worldwide environmental issue because of its impact on ecosystems and human health. Biodegradation plays an important role in PAH removal in natural environments. To date, many PAH-degrading strains and degradation genes have been reported. However, a comprehensive PAH-degrading gene database is still lacking, hindering a deep understanding of PAH degraders in the era of big data. Furthermore, the relationships between the PAH-catabolic genotype and phenotype remain unclear. RESULTS: Here, we established a bacterial PAH-degrading gene database and explored PAH biodegradation capability via a genome-function relationship approach. The investigation of functional genes in the experimentally verified PAH degraders indicated that genes encoding hydratase-aldolase could serve as a biomarker for preliminarily identifying potential degraders. Additionally, a genome-centric interpretation of PAH-degrading genes was performed in the public genome database, demonstrating that they were ubiquitous in Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria. Meanwhile, the global phylogenetic distribution was generally consistent with the culture-based evidence. Notably, a few strains affiliated with the genera without any previously known PAH degraders (Hyphomonas, Hoeflea, Henriciella, Saccharomonospora, Sciscionella, Tepidiphilus, and Xenophilus) also bore a complete PAH-catabolic gene cluster, implying their potential of PAH biodegradation. Moreover, a random forest analysis was applied to predict the PAH-degrading trait in the complete genome database, revealing 28 newly predicted PAH degraders, of which nine strains encoded a complete PAH-catabolic pathway. CONCLUSIONS: Our results established a comprehensive PAH-degrading gene database and a genome-function relationship approach, which revealed several potential novel PAH-degrader lineages. Importantly, this genome-centric and function-oriented approach can overcome the bottleneck of conventional cultivation-based biodegradation research and substantially expand our current knowledge on the potential degraders of environmental pollutants.

The thus devised ketamine pathway 'KetPath' knowledge graph comprises five parts: (i) manually curated pathway facts from images; (ii) recognized named entities in biomedical texts; (iii) identified relations between named entities; (iv) our previously constructed microbiota and pre-/probiotics knowledge bases; and (v) multiple community-accepted public databases. We first assessed the performance of automated extraction of relations between named entities using the specially designed state-of-the-art tool BioKetBERT. The query results show that we can retrieve drug actions, pathway relations, co-occurring entities, and their relations. These results uncover several biological findings, such as various gut microbes leading to increased expression of BDNF, which may contribute to the sustained antidepressant effects of ketamine. We envision that the methods and findings from this research will aid researchers who wish to integrate and query data and knowledge from multiple biomedical databases and literature simultaneously. AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Data and query protocols are available in the KetPath repository at https://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8398941 and https://github.com/tingcosmos/KetPath.

The infant gut microbiome undergoes rapid changes in the first year of life, supporting normal development and long-term health. While diet shapes this process, the role of fibers in complementary foods on gut microbiome maturation is poorly understood. OBJECTIVES: We explored how the transition from human milk to fibers in complementary foods shapes the taxonomic and functional maturation of the gut microbiome within the first year of life. METHODS: We assessed the longitudinal and cross-sectional development of infant gut microbiomes (N=68 infants) and metabolomes (N=33 infants) using linear mixed models to uncover their associations to dietary fibers and their food sources. Fiber intakes were assessed with 3-day food records (months 3,6,9,12) relying on CODEX-compliant fiber fraction values, and questionnaires tracked the overall complementary food introduction. Bacterial species were identified and quantified via MetaPhlAn2 from metagenomic data, and metabolomic profiles were obtained using four LC-MS methods. RESULTS: We identified 176 complementary food fiber-bacterial species associations. First plant-based fibers associated to microbiota compositions similar to breastfeeding, and further associated with aromatic amino acid metabolites, including 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (Total dietary fiber - Complementary foods (g) - β=3.50, CI 2.48-4.52, p=6.53x10-5). Distinct fibers from different food categories showed unique associations with specific bacterial taxa. Key species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitznii, associated with oat fibers (g/MJ, β=2.18, CI 1.36-2.84, p=6.12x10-6), reflective of maturing microbial communities. Fiber intake during weaning associated with shifts in metabolite profiles, including immunomodulatory metabolites, with fiber effects observed in a source- and timing-dependent manner, implicated in gradual microbiome diversification. CONCLUSIONS: Introducing complementary dietary fibers during the weaning period supports gut microbiome diversification and stabilization. Even minor dietary variations showed significant associations with microbial taxa and functions from the onset of weaning, highlighting the importance of infant dietary recommendations that support the gut microbiome maturation during early life. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01735123. Date of registration: November 24, 2012. https://www. CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT01735123.

Alcohol intake can alter gut microbiome, which may subsequently affect human health. However, limited population-based, prospective studies have investigated associations of habitual and recent alcohol intake with the gut microbiome, particularly among Black/African American individuals. OBJECTIVE: We examined the association of alcohol intake with gut microbiome in a predominantly low-income Black/African American population. METHODS: We investigated the dose- and type-specific associations of habitual and recent alcohol intake with the gut microbiome among 538 Black/African American adults (150 males and 388 females). Habitual and recent alcohol intakes were assessed at cohort baseline (2002-2009) and stool collection (2018-2021), respectively. Gut microbiome was profiled using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Generalized linear models were employed to evaluate the associations between alcohol intakes and gut microbiome composition, with adjustments for sociodemographic characteristics, other lifestyle factors, and comorbidities. False discovery rate (FDR) <0.1 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: The mean age at enrollment was 53.2 ± 7.7 y, with a mean interval of 13.8 y (range: 9.0-18.1 y) between baseline and stool sample collection. Recent alcohol intake was not significantly associated with microbial taxa abundance. However, habitual alcohol intake, both total amount and types of alcoholic beverages, showed significant associations with several microbial taxa abundance, primarily in males, including species within classes Clostridia, Bacilli, and Mahellia within Firmicutes. Specifically, total alcohol, beer, and red wine intakes were all inversely associated with genus MGYG-HGUT-02719 within class Clostridia (β = -2.26 to -0.09 per 1 drink/d increase). Red wine consumption was also inversely associated with the abundance of genera CAG-110, Oscillibacter, and Gemmiger within class Clostridia (β = -3.88 to -2.69), whereas positively associated with genus Absiella (β = 1.81) within class Bacilli. Most of these associations remained significant after additionally adjusting for BMI and baseline comorbidities. CONCLUSIONS: We identified gut microbial taxa associated with habitual alcohol intake among Black/African American males, although the magnitudes of these associations were generally small. Further research is needed to determine if these bacteria modify alcohol-disease relationships.

The site-of-disease microbiome and predicted metagenome were evaluated in a cross-sectional study involving people with presumptive tuberculous pericarditis. We also explored the interaction between C-reactive protein (CRP) and the microbiome. METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) provided pericardial fluid for sequencing and blood for CRP measurement. RESULTS: Pericardial fluid microbiota differed in β-diversity among people with definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous pericarditis. dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria-enriched vs. nTBs. HIV-positive dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium-, Methylobacterium-, and Leptothrix-enriched vs. HIV-negative dTBs. HIV-positive dTBs on ART were Mycobacterium- and Bifidobacterium-depleted vs. those not on ART. dTBs exhibited enrichment in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and mycobacterial metabolism pathways vs. nTBs. Additional non-pericardial involvement (pulmonary infiltrates) was associated with Mycobacterium-enrichment and Streptococcus-depletion. Mycobacterium reads were in 34 % (31/91) of dTBs, 8 % (2/25) of pTBs and 17 % (4/23) nTBs. People with CRP above (vs. below) the median value had different β-diversity (Pseudomonas-depleted). No correlation was found between enriched taxa in dTBs and CRP. CONCLUSIONS: Pericardial fluid microbial composition varies by tuberculosis status, HIV (and ART) status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The clinical significance, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires evaluation.

We retrospectively analyzed mNGS data from the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of 83 pediatric ALRIs patients from 2019 to 2023. Microbial diversity and relative abundances of specific taxa were compared between survivor and non-survivor groups, as well as between varying severity levels. LEfSe was employed to identify key biomarkers related to survival and disease severity. RESULTS: Among the 83 patients, 68 survived and 15 died. Patients were also divided into a low severity group (n = 38) and a moderate-to-very-high severity group (n = 45) according to mPIRO score at admission. Significant differences in beta diversity were observed between the survival groups and across different severity levels. Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella exhibited higher abundances in both the survivor and low severity groups, suggesting their potential as predictors of better outcomes. Conversely, Enterococcus and Acinetobacter baumannii were more prevalent in the non-survivor and moderate-to-very-high severity groups. Additionally, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus mitis showed increased abundances in survivors. LEfSe further revealed that these microorganisms may predict outcomes and severity in ALRIs. CONCLUSION: Our findings underscore the complex relationship between lung microbiota and ALRIs, with specific microbial profiles associated with disease severity and clinical outcomes. This underscores the need for further research to explore and validate its prognostic predictive capacity. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented. METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were performed. RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data. CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is linked to host gut dysbiosis. Here we performed faecal gut microbiome sequencing to investigate SLE-pathogenic gut microbes and their potential mechanisms. METHODS: There were 134 healthy controls (HCs) and 114 SLE cases for 16 S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing and 97 HCs and 124 SLE cases for shotgun metagenomics. Faecal microbial changes and associations with clinical phenotypes were evaluated, and SLE-associated microbial genera were identified in amplicon analysis. Next, metagenomic sequencing was applied for accurate identification of microbial species and discovery of their metabolic pathways and immunogenic peptides both relevant to SLE. Finally, contribution of specific taxa to disease development was confirmed by oral gavage into lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice. RESULTS: SLE patients had gut microbiota richness reduction and composition alteration, particularly lupus nephritis and active patients. Proteobacteria/Bacteroidetes (P/B) ratio was remarkably up-regulated, and Escherichia was identified as the dominantly expanded genus in SLE, followed by metagenomics accurately located Escherichia coli and Escherichia unclassified species. Significant associations primarily appeared among Escherichia coli, metabolic pathways of purine nucleotide salvage or peptidoglycan maturation and SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI), and between multiple epitopes from Escherichia coli and disease activity or renal involvement phenotype. Finally, gavage with faecal Escherichia revealed that it upregulated lupus-associated serum traits and aggravated glomerular lesions in MRL/lpr mice. CONCLUSION: We characterize a novel SLE exacerbating Escherichia outgrowth and suggest its contribution to SLE procession may be partially associated with metabolite changes and cross-reactivity of gut microbiota-associated epitopes and host autoantigens. The findings could provide a deeper insight into gut Escherichia in the procession of SLE.

In this study, 12 CTEPH fresh thrombi and 12 organized thrombi were collected from 14 patients with CTEPH. Metagenomic sequencing was employed to explore the genomic information of all microorganisms in the thrombus samples. RESULTS: Our data demonstrated a diverse range of microorganisms in CTEPH thrombi, whether fresh or organized. Notably, a considerable proportion (54.7 %) of sequencing data could not be classified into the relative microbial taxa, highlighting the complexity and novelty of the thrombus ecosystem. Although there were no significant differences in microbial community structure between the two groups, the abundance of dominant microbial species varied. Leuconostoc sp. DORA 2, Staphylococcus aureus, and Aliidongia dinghuensis were common dominant species in CTEPH thrombus. Organized thrombus significantly increased the relative abundance of Staphylococcus aureus, which was confirmed to effectively distinguish between organized and fresh thrombi by LeFSe analysis and random forest analysis. Functional annotation using both the KEGG and eggNOG databases revealed that organized thrombi exhibit stronger metabolic functions, particularly in amino acid metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that microbial composition and function may play an important role in thrombus organization. Targeting inflammation to prevent thrombosis presents promising opportunities for further research in this area.

Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) is a progressive autoimmune liver disease. An inadequate response to ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) poses a high risk of progression toward end-stage liver disease. Gut dysbiosis has been implicated in PBC. Here, we aimed to investigate microbial signatures that permit risk stratification and provide mechanistic insights into novel therapies for PBC. METHODS: We prospectively recruited UDCA treatment-naive patients with PBC and performed metagenomic sequencing and metabolomic profiling using stool and serum samples obtained before (n = 132) and after (n = 59) treatment. PBC microbiome subtypes were identified using unsupervised machine learning methods and validated in two independent cohorts. FINDINGS: PBC baseline metagenomes clustered into two community subtypes characterized by varying abundances of Clostridia taxa. Compared with Clostridialow microbiomes, Clostridiahigh microbiomes were more similar to healthy controls. Notably, patients in the Clostridialow subtype exhibited a 2-fold higher UDCA non-response rate compared to those in the Clostridiahigh subtype (41% vs. 20%, p = 0.015). Integrative analysis of metagenomic and metabolomic data revealed divergent functional modules and metabolic activities between the two metacommunities. In particular, anaerobic fermentation and the production of bioactive metabolites, including tryptophan derivatives and secondary bile acids, crucial for immune regulation and gut barrier maintenance, were markedly diminished in the Clostridialow subtype. Moreover, UDCA administration reconfigured the fecal microbial and metabolic profiles only in the Clostridiahigh group. Importantly, the microbiome subtypes and their associations with UDCA response were reproducible in two independent treatment-naive PBC cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: Characterizing baseline microbiota patterns may enable the prediction of treatment outcomes in PBC and facilitate personalized treatment strategies. FUNDING: This research was mainly supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China.

Haemaphysalis qinghaiensis is a tick species distributed only in China. Due to its ability to transmit a variety of pathogens, including species of the genera Anaplasma, Rickettsia, Babesia, and Theileria, it seriously endangers livestock husbandry. However, the microbial community of the midgut of H. qinghaiensis females collected from yaks and Tibetan sheep has not yet been characterized using metagenomic sequencing technology. METHODS: Haemaphysalis qinghaiensis were collected from the skins of yaks and Tibetan sheep in Gansu Province, China. Genomic DNA was extracted from the midguts and midgut contents of fully engorged H. qinghaiensis females collected from the two hosts. Metagenomic sequencing technology was used to analyze the microbial community of the two groups. RESULTS: Fifty-seven phyla, 483 genera, and 755 species were identified in the two groups of samples. The ticks from the two hosts harbored common and unique microorganisms. At the phylum level, the dominant common phyla were Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Mucoromycota. At the genus level, the dominant common genera were Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, and Pseudomonas. At the species level, bacteria including Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia minasensis, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa along with eukaryotes such as Synchytrium endobioticum and Rhizophagus irregularis, and viruses such as the orf virus, Alphadintovirus mayetiola, and Parasteatoda house spider adintovirus were detected in both groups. In addition, the midgut of H. qinghaiensis collected from yaks had unique microbial taxa including two phyla, eight genera, and 23 species. Unique microorganisms in the midgut of H. qinghaiensis collected from Tibetan sheep included two phyla, 14 genera, and 32 species. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes enrichment analysis revealed that the functional genes of the microbiome of H. qinghaiensis were annotated to six pathways, and the metabolic pathways included 11 metabolic processes, in which the genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism were the most abundant, followed by the genes involved in lipid metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that most of the microbial species in the collected H. qinghaiensis ticks were the same in both hosts, but there were also slight differences. The analytical data from this study have enhanced our understanding of the midgut microbial composition of H. qinghaiensis collected from different hosts. The database of H. qinghaiensis microbe constructed from this study will lay the foundation for predicting tick-borne diseases. Furthermore, a comprehensive understanding of tick microbiomes will be useful for understanding vector competency and interactions with ticks and midgut microorganisms.

Utilizing metagenomic data from the Study of a Prospective Adult Research Cohort with Inflammatory Bowel Disease, available via the IBD Plexus Program of the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation, we used a tree-based dichotomous approach to assemble distinct clusters of species-level bacterial co-abundance groups (CAGs). We evaluated the abundance of bacterial CAGs and fungal taxa during remission (n=166) and activity (n=46). We examined if the bacterial CAGs identified in our cohorts were conserved in 2 healthy cohorts and in a Korean UC cohort. RESULTS: CAG3 and CAG8, dominated by bacteria from family Lachnospiraceae, were associated with remission. Low CAG8 and elevated Candida genus were predictive of active UC. Constituents from CAG8 were influential hub species of the remission-associated microbial UC network, including Ruminococcus gnavus, Erysipelatoclostridium ramosum, Blautia and Dorea species. These hub species interactions were preserved in 2 healthy cohorts and were partially recapitulated in a Korean UC cohort. CAG8 abundance correlated with the secondary bile acid production pathway. Bacterial CAGs did not correlate with Candida, however Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Alistipes putredinis were negatively associated with Candida. CONCLUSIONS: Lachnospiriceae-dominated bacterial CAGs were associated with remission in UC, with key bacterial interactions within the CAG also observed in 2 healthy cohorts and a Korean UC cohort. Bacterial CAG-based analyses may help to inform the design of candidate consortia for microbiome-based therapeutics.

To address this issue, we performed a systematic annotation of Nicotine-Degrading Enzymes (NDEs) from genomes and metagenomes of human microbiota. A total of 26,295 genomes and 1,596 metagenomes for human microbiota were downloaded from public databases and five types of NDEs were annotated with a custom pipeline. We found 959 NdhB, 785 NdhL, 987 NicX, three NicA1, and three NicA2 homologs. RESULTS: Genomic classification revealed that six phylum-level taxa, including Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Firmicutes_A, Bacteroidota, Actinobacteriota, and Chloroflexota, can produce NDEs, with Proteobacteria encoding all five types of NDEs studied. Analysis of NicX prevalence revealed differences among body sites. NicX homologs were found in gut and oral samples with a high prevalence but not found in lung samples. NicX was found in samples from both smokers and non-smokers, though the prevalence might be different. CONCLUSION: This study represents the first systematic investigation of NDEs from the human microbiota, providing new insights into the physiology and ecological functions of human microbiota and shedding new light on the development of nicotine-degrading probiotics for the treatment of smoking-related diseases.

Fecal samples were collected from 93 owned pet dogs. Dogs were designated as either clinically healthy or OA pain using validated methods. Metagenomic profiling was performed through shotgun sequencing using the Illumina NovaSeq platform. MetaPhlAn2 and HUMAnN2 were used to evaluate bacterial taxonomic and pathway relative abundance. Comparisons between healthy and OA-pain groups were performed individually for each taxa using nonparametric tests following Benjamini and Hochberg adjustment for multiple comparisons. Permutation analysis of variance was performed using Bray-Curtis distance matrices. All downstream analyses were completed in R. RESULTS: No significant differences between healthy and OA-pain dogs were observed for alpha and beta diversity. We found 13 taxa with nominally significant (P < 0.05) associations with OA case status, but none of the associations remained significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons. No differences in alpha or beta diversities or the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio were found regarding pain severity, mobility or activity level, age, or body composition score. CONCLUSION: Similar to recent studies in humans, the present study did not demonstrate a significant difference in the fecal microbial communities between dogs with OA pain and healthy control dogs. Future research in this naturally occurring model should expand on these data and relate the gut microbiome to gut permeability and circulating proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory molecules to better understand the influence of the gut microbiome on OA and OA pain.

Chronic exposure to microorganisms inside homes can impact respiratory health. Few studies have used advanced sequencing methods to examine adult respiratory outcomes, especially continuous measures. We aimed to identify metagenomic profiles in house dust related to the quantitative traits of pulmonary function and airway inflammation in adults. Microbial communities, 1264 species (389 genera), in vacuumed bedroom dust from 779 homes in a US cohort were characterized by whole metagenome shotgun sequencing. We examined two overall microbial diversity measures: richness (the number of individual microbial species) and Shannon index (reflecting both richness and relative abundance). To identify specific differentially abundant genera, we applied the Lasso estimator with high-dimensional inference methods, a novel framework for analyzing microbiome data in relation to continuous traits after accounting for all taxa examined together. RESULTS: Pulmonary function measures (forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1/FVC ratio) were not associated with overall dust microbial diversity. However, many individual microbial genera were differentially abundant (p-value < 0.05 controlling for all other microbial taxa examined) in relation to FEV1, FVC, or FEV1/FVC. Similarly, fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO), a marker of airway inflammation, was unrelated to overall microbial diversity but associated with differential abundance for many individual genera. Several genera, including Limosilactobacillus, were associated with a pulmonary function measure and FeNO, while others, including Moraxella to FEV1/FVC and Stenotrophomonas to FeNO, were associated with a single trait. CONCLUSIONS: Using state-of-the-art metagenomic sequencing, we identified specific microorganisms in indoor dust related to pulmonary function and airway inflammation. Some were previously associated with respiratory conditions; others were novel, suggesting specific environmental microbial components contribute to various respiratory outcomes. The methods used are applicable to studying microbiome in relation to other continuous outcomes. Video Abstract.

Rat fecal samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing technology. Bioinformatic and correlation analyses were performed on microbiota data to determine significant associations. SRL substantially attenuated the adverse effects exerted by PF on the structure and diversity of gut microbiota while regulating its alpha and beta diversities. Linear discriminant analysis effect size enabled the identification of 62 differentially abundant microbial taxa. Gut microbiota abundance analysis revealed that SRL significantly increased the relative abundance of bacterial phyla such as Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. Moreover, SRL increased the proportion of beneficial bacteria, such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteriales, decreased the proportion of pathogenic bacteria, such as Rikenellaceae, and balanced the gut microbiota by regulating metabolic pathways. CONCLUSIONS: SRL may attenuate PF by regulating gut microbiota. This exploratory study establishes the groundwork for investigating the metagenomics of PF.

Ruminant gut microbiota are critical in ecological adaptation, evolution, and nutrition utilization because it regulates energy metabolism, promotes nutrient absorption, and improves immune function. To study the functional roles of key gut microbiota in sheep and goats, it is essential to construct reference microbial gene catalogs and high-quality microbial genomes database. RESULTS: A total of 320 fecal samples were collected from 21 different sheep and goat breeds, originating from 32 distinct farms. Metagenomic deep sequencing and binning assembly were utilized to construct a comprehensive microbial genome information database for the gut microbiota. We successfully generated the largest reference gene catalogs for gut microbiota in sheep and goats, containing over 162 million and 82 million nonredundant predicted genes, respectively, with 49 million shared nonredundant predicted genes and 1138 shared species. We found that the rearing environment has a greater impact on microbial composition and function than the host's species effect. Through subsequent assembly, we obtained 5810 medium- and high-quality metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs), out of which 2661 were yet unidentified species. Among these MAGs, we identified 91 bacterial taxa that specifically colonize the sheep gut, which encode polysaccharide utilization loci for glycan and mucin degradation. CONCLUSIONS: By shedding light on the co-symbiotic microbial communities in the gut of small ruminants, our study significantly enhances the understanding of their nutrient degradation and disease susceptibility. Our findings emphasize the vast potential of untapped resources in functional bacterial species within ruminants, further expanding our knowledge of how the ruminant gut microbiota recognizes and processes glycan and mucins. Video Abstract.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from complex interactions between host and environment, which include the gut and tissue microbiome. It is hypothesized that epigenetic regulation by gut microbiota is a fundamental interface by which commensal microbes dynamically influence intestinal biology. The aim of this study is to explore the interplay between gut and tissue microbiota and host DNA methylation in CRC. METHODS: Metagenomic sequencing of fecal samples was performed on matched CRC patients (n = 18) and healthy controls (n = 18). Additionally, tissue microbiome was profiled with 16S rRNA gene sequencing on tumor (n = 24) and tumor-adjacent normal (n = 24) tissues of CRC patients, while host DNA methylation was assessed through whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) in a subset of 13 individuals. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed substantial alterations in the DNA methylome of CRC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues. An extensive meta-analysis, incorporating publicly available and in-house data, identified significant shifts in microbial-derived methyl donor-related pathways between tumor and adjacent normal tissues. Of note, we observed a pronounced enrichment of microbial-associated CpGs within the promoter regions of genes in adjacent normal tissues, a phenomenon notably absent in tumor tissues. Furthermore, we established consistent and recurring associations between methylation patterns of tumor-related genes and specific bacterial taxa. CONCLUSIONS: This study emphasizes the pivotal role of the gut microbiota and pathogenic bacteria in dynamically shaping DNA methylation patterns, impacting physiological homeostasis, and contributing to CRC tumorigenesis. These findings provide valuable insights into the intricate host-environment interactions in CRC development and offer potential avenues for therapeutic interventions in this disease.

Whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing were performed on the gut microbiomes of fecal samples collected using these two methods from 10 adult cats housed in the same research facility. We evaluated the influence of collection methods on feline microbiome analysis, particularly their impact on DNA extraction, metagenomic sequencing yield, microbial composition, and diversity in subsequent gut microbiome analyses. Interestingly, fecal sample collection using a fecal loop resulted in a lower yield of microbial DNA compared to the litterbox method (p = 0.004). However, there were no significant differences between the two groups in the proportion of host contamination (p = 0.106), virus contamination (p = 0.232), relative taxonomy abundance of top five phyla (Padj > 0.638), or the number of microbial genes covered (p = 0.770). Furthermore, no significant differences were observed in alpha-diversity, beta-diversity, the number of taxa identified at each taxonomic level, and the relative abundance of taxonomic units. DISCUSSION: These two sample collection methods do not affect microbial population structures within fecal samples and collecting fecal samples directly from the litterbox within 6 hours after defecation can be considered a reliable approach for microbiome research.

The microbiome likely plays a role in tuberculosis (TB) pathogenesis. We evaluated the site-of-disease microbiome and predicted metagenome in people with presumptive tuberculous pericarditis, a major cause of mortality, and explored for the first time, the interaction between its association with C-reactive protein (CRP), a potential diagnostic biomarker and the site-of-disease microbiome in extrapulmonary TB. METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) provided background sampling controls and pericardial fluid (PF) for 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysed using QIIME2 and PICRUSt2. Blood was collected to measure CRP. RESULTS: PF from people with definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous pericarditis differed in β-diversity. dTBs were, vs. nTBs, Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria- enriched. Within dTBs, HIV-positives were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium- , Methylobacterium- , and Leptothrix -enriched vs. HIV-negatives and HIV-positive dTBs on ART were Mycobacterium - and Bifidobacterium -depleted vs. those not on ART. Compared to nTBs, dTBs exhibited short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and mycobacterial metabolism microbial pathway enrichment. People with additional non-pericardial involvement had differentially PF taxa (e.g., Mycobacterium -enrichment and Streptococcus -depletion associated with pulmonary infiltrates). Mycobacterium reads were in 34% (31/91), 8% (2/25) and 17% (4/23) of dTBs, pTBs, and nTBs, respectively. β-diversity differed between patients with CRP above vs. below the median value ( Pseudomonas -depleted). There was no correlation between enriched taxa in dTBs and CRP. CONCLUSIONS: PF is compositionally distinct based on TB status, HIV (and ART) status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The clinical significance of these findings, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires evaluation.

Organophosphorus pesticides (OP) have been associated with various human health conditions. Animal experiments and in-vitro models suggested that OP may also affect the gut microbiota. We examined associations between ambient chronic exposure to OP and gut microbial changes in humans. METHODS: We recruited 190 participants from a community-based epidemiologic study of Parkinson's disease living in a region known for heavy agricultural pesticide use in California. Of these, 61% of participants had Parkinson's disease and their mean age was 72 years. Microbiome and predicted metagenome data were generated by 16S rRNA gene sequencing of fecal samples. Ambient long-term OP exposures were assessed using pesticide application records combined with residential addresses in a geographic information system. We examined gut microbiome differences due to OP exposures, specifically differences in microbial diversity based on the Shannon index and Bray-Curtis dissimilarities, and differential taxa abundance and predicted Metacyc pathway expression relying on regression models and adjusting for potential confounders. RESULTS: OP exposure was not associated with alpha or beta diversity of the gut microbiome. However, the predicted metagenome was sparser and less evenly expressed among those highly exposed to OP (p = 0.04). Additionally, we found that the abundance of two bacterial families, 22 genera, and the predicted expression of 34 Metacyc pathways were associated with long-term OP exposure. These pathways included perturbed processes related to cellular respiration, increased biosynthesis and degradation of compounds related to bacterial wall structure, increased biosynthesis of RNA/DNA precursors, and decreased synthesis of Vitamin B1 and B6. CONCLUSION: In support of previous animal studies and in-vitro findings, our results suggest that ambient chronic OP pesticide exposure alters gut microbiome composition and its predicted metabolism in humans.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an immune-mediated chronic inflammatory condition with a worldwide distribution. Although the etiology of this disease is still unknown, the understanding of the role of the microbiota is becoming increasingly strong. AIM: To investigate the predictive power of the gut microbiota for the diagnosis of UC in a cohort of newly diagnosed treatment-naïve Saudi children with UC. METHODS: The study population included 20 children with a confirmed diagnosis of UC and 20 healthy controls. Microbial DNA was extracted and sequenced, and shotgun metagenomic analysis was performed for bacteria and bacteriophages. Biostatistics and bioinformatics demonstrated significant dysbiosis in the form of reduced alpha diversity, beta diversity, and significant difference of abundance of taxa between children with UC and control groups. The receiver operating characteristic curve, a probability curve, was used to determine the difference between the UC and control groups. The area under the curve (AUC) represents the degree of separability between the UC group and the control group. The AUC was calculated for all identified bacterial species and for bacterial species identified by the random forest classification algorithm as important potential biomarkers of UC. A similar method of AUC calculation for all bacteriophages and important species was used. RESULTS: The median age and range were 14 (0.5-21) and 12.9 (6.8-16.3) years for children with UC and controls, respectively, and 40% and 35% were male for children with UC and controls, respectively. The AUC for all identified bacterial species was 89.5%. However, when using the bacterial species identified as important by random forest classification algorithm analysis, the accuracy increased to 97.6%. Similarly, the AUC for all the identified bacteriophages was 87.4%, but this value increased to 94.5% when the important bacteriophage biomarkers were used. CONCLUSION: The very high to excellent AUCs of fecal bacterial and viral species suggest the potential use of noninvasive microbiota-based tests for the diagnosis of unusual cases of UC in children. In addition, the identification of important bacteria and bacteriophages whose abundance is reduced in children with UC suggests the potential of preventive and adjuvant microbial therapy for UC.

Pre-term birth, the leading cause of neonatal mortality, has been associated with maternal periodontal disease and the presence of oral pathogens in the placenta. However, the mechanisms that underpin this link are not known. This investigation aimed to identify the origins of placental microbiota and to interrogate the association between parturition complications and immune recognition of placental microbial motifs. Video Abstract METHODS: Saliva, plaque, serum, and placenta were collected during 130 full-term (FT), pre-term (PT), or pre-term complicated by pre-eclampsia (PTPE) deliveries and subjected to whole-genome shotgun sequencing. Real-time quantitative PCR was used to measure toll-like receptors (TLR) 1-10 expression in placental samples. Source tracking was employed to trace the origins of the placental microbiota. RESULTS: We discovered 10,007 functionally annotated genes representing 420 taxa in the placenta that could not be attributed to contamination. Placental microbial composition was the biggest discriminator of pregnancy complications, outweighing hypertension, BMI, smoking, and maternal age. A machine-learning algorithm trained on this microbial dataset predicted PTPE and PT with error rates of 4.05% and 8.6% (taxonomy) and 6.21% and 7.38% (function). Logistic regression revealed 32% higher odds of parturition complication (95% CI 2.8%, 81%) for every IQR increase in the Shannon diversity index after adjusting for maternal smoking status, maternal age, and gravida. We also discovered distinct expression patterns of TLRs that detect RNA- and DNA-containing antigens in the three groups, with significant upregulation of TLR9, and concomitant downregulation of TLR7 in PTPE and PT groups, and dense correlation networks between microbial genes and these TLRs. 70-82% of placental microbiota were traced to serum and thence to the salivary and subgingival microbiomes. The oral and serum microbiomes of PTPE and PT groups displayed significant enrichment of genes encoding iron transport, exosome, adhesion, quorum sensing, lipopolysaccharide, biofilm, and steroid degradation. CONCLUSIONS: Within the limits of cross-sectional analysis, we find evidence to suggest that oral bacteria might translocate to the placenta via serum and trigger immune signaling pathways capable of inducing placental vascular pathology. This might explain, in part, the higher incidence of obstetric syndromes in women with periodontal disease.

The microbiota in the sputum of people with bronchiectasis has repeatedly been investigated in cohorts of different geographic origin, but so far has not been studied to the species level in comparison to control populations including healthy adults and smokers without lung disease. METHODS: The microbial metagenome from sputa of 101 European Bronchiectasis Registry (EMBARC) study participants was examined by using whole-genome shotgun sequencing. RESULTS: Our analysis of the metagenome of people with bronchiectasis revealed four clusters characterised by a predominance of Haemophilus influenzae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa or polymicrobial communities with varying compositions of nonpathogenic commensals and opportunistic pathogens. The metagenomes of the severely affected patients showed individual profiles characterised by low alpha diversity. Importantly, nearly 50% of patients with severe disease were grouped in a cluster characterised by commensals. Comparisons with the sputum metagenomes of healthy smokers and healthy nonsmokers revealed a gradient of depletion of taxa in bronchiectasis, most often Neisseria subflava, Fusobacterium periodonticum and Eubacterium sulci. CONCLUSION: The gradient of depletion of commensal taxa found in healthy airways is a key feature of bronchiectasis associated with disease severity.

In this study, we investigated the impact of C. minuta on fecal microbiota via metagenomic sequencing, focusing on retrieving bacterial strains and coculture assays of C. minuta with associated microbial partners. RESULTS: Our results showed that C. minuta intervention significantly reduced the diversity of fecal microorganisms, but specifically enhanced some groups of bacteria, such as Lactobacillaceae. C. minuta selectively enriched bacterial pathways that compensated for its metabolic defects on vitamin B1, B12, serine, and glutamate synthesis. Meanwhile, C. minuta cross-feeds Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and other bacteria via the production of arginine, branched-chain amino acids, fumaric acids and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as acetic. Both metagenomic data analysis and culture experiments revealed that C. minuta negatively correlated with Klebsiella pneumoniae and 14 other bacterial taxa, while positively correlated with F. prausnitzii. Our results advance our comprehension of C. minuta's in modulating the gut microbial network. CONCLUSIONS: C. minuta disrupts the composition of the fecal microbiota. This disturbance is manifested through cross-feeding, nutritional competition, and supplementation of its own metabolic deficiencies, resulting in the specific enrichment or inhibition of the growth of certain bacteria. This study will shed light on the application of C. minuta as a probiotic for effective interventions on gut microbiomes and improvement of host health.

Kidney graft rejection still represents the major cause of graft loss in kidney transplant recipients. Of growing interest is the bidirectional relationship between gut microbiome and immune system suggesting that gut microbiota can affect allograft outcome. METHODS: In this cross-sectional case-control study, we characterized the gut microbial profile of adult renal transplant recipients with and without graft rejection to define a cohort-specific microbial fingerprint through 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing. We used very strict inclusion and exclusion criteria to address confounder of microbiota composition. RESULTS: Different relative abundances in several gut microbial taxa were detectable in control patients compared with patients with kidney allograft rejection. Alpha diversity was lower in the rejection group and beta diversity revealed dissimilarity between patients with and without kidney graft rejection (P < 0.01). When the rejection group was stratified according to different types of allograft rejection, major changes were identified between patients with chronic T-cellular-mediated rejection and controls. Changes in alpha diversity within the gut microbiome were related to the probability of chronic T-cellular-mediated rejection (P < 0.05). Kidney transplant patients without rejection showed significant enrichment of rather anti-inflammatory taxa whereas in the rejection group bacteria well known for their role in chronic inflammation were increased. For example, amplicon sequence variant (ASV) 362 belonging to the genus Bacteroides and ASV 312 belonging to Tannerellaceae were enriched in no rejection (P < 0.001 and P < 0.01), whereas ASV 365 was enriched in patients with allograft rejection (P = 0.04). Looking at metagenomic functions, a higher abundance of genes coding for enzymes involved in bacterial multidrug resistance and processing of short-chain fatty acids was found in patients without rejection but an increase in enzymes involved in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate production was seen in patients with allograft rejection. CONCLUSIONS: A distinct microbial fingerprint of patients with allograft rejection might serve as noninvasive biomarker in the future.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading cancer worldwide. Microbial agents have been considered to contribute to the pathogenesis of different disease. But the underlying relevance between CRC and microbiota remain unclear. METHODS: We dissected the fecal microbiome structure and genomic and transcriptomic profiles of matched tumor and normal mucosa tissues from 41 CRC patients. Of which, the relationship between CRC-associated bacterial taxa and their significantly correlated somatic mutated gene was investigated by exome sequencing technology. Differentially expressed functional genes in CRC were clustered according to their correlation with differentially abundant species, following by annotation with DAVID. The composition of immune and stromal cell types was identified by XCELL. RESULTS: We identified a set of 22 microbial gut species associated with CRC and estimate the relative abundance of KEGG ontology categories. Next, the interactions between CRC-related gut microbes and clinical phenotypes were evaluated. 4 significantly mutated gene: TP53, APC, KRAS, SMAD4 were pointed out and the associations with cancer related microbes were identified. Among them, Fusobacterium nucleatum positively corelated with different host metabolic pathways. Finally, we revealed that Fusobacterium nucleatum modified the tumor immune environment by TNFSF9 gene expression. CONCLUSION: Collectively, our multi-omics data could help identify novel biomarkers to inform clinical decision-making in the detection and diagnosis of CRC.

The recent recognition of the importance of the microbiome to the host's health and well-being has yielded efforts to develop therapies that aim to shift the microbiome from a disease-associated state to a healthier one. Direct manipulation techniques of the species' assemblage are currently available, e.g., using probiotics or narrow-spectrum antibiotics to introduce or eliminate specific taxa. However, predicting the species' abundances at the new state remains a challenge, mainly due to the difficulties of deciphering the delicate underlying network of ecological interactions or constructing a predictive model for such complex ecosystems. RESULTS: Here, we propose a model-free method to predict the species' abundances at the new steady state based on their presence/absence configuration by utilizing a multi-dimensional k-nearest-neighbors (kNN) regression algorithm. By analyzing data from numeric simulations of ecological dynamics, we show that our predictions, which consider the presence/absence of all species holistically, outperform both the null model that uses the statistics of each species independently and a predictive neural network model. We analyze real metagenomic data of human-associated microbial communities and find that by relying on a small number of "neighboring" samples, i.e., samples with similar species assemblage, the kNN predicts the species abundance better than the whole-cohort average. By studying both real metagenomic and simulated data, we show that the predictability of our method is tightly related to the dissimilarity-overlap relationship of the training data. CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate how model-free methods can prove useful in predicting microbial communities and may facilitate the development of microbial-based therapies. Video Abstract.

We conducted a metagenomics study utilizing the sequences of RAD-tag/genotype-by-sequence libraries from leaf tissues of C. florida to examine such host-fungus interactions across the dogwood's US range. We performed various combinations of alignments to both host and pathogen genomes to obtain filtered sets sequences for metagenomics analysis. Taxonomic assignments were determined on each filtered set of sequences, followed by estimation of microbial diversity and correlation to environment and host-genetic variation. RESULTS: Our data showed that microbial community composition significantly differed between visually healthy and diseased sites. Several microbial taxa known to interact with dogwood were identified from these sequences. We found no correlation between microbial diversity and relative abundances of sequences aligning to draft genomes of either pathogen causing powdery mildew or dogwood anthracnose. We found a significant relationship between differences of fungal communities and geographic distances of plant populations, suggesting roles of environments in shaping fungal communities in leaf tissues. Significant correlations between the genetic differentiation of plant samples and fungal community dissimilarity (beta diversity) were also observed in certain sets of our analyses-suggesting the possibility of a relationship between microbial community composition and plant genetic distance. This relationship persisted in significance even after controlling for significant effects of geographic-bioclimatic variation of microbial diversity. DISCUSSION: Our results suggest that both genetics and the environment play a significant role in shaping foliar fungal communities. Our findings underscore the power of leveraging hidden microbial sequences within datasets originally collected for plant genetic studies to understand plant-pathogen interactions.

In this study, we performed metagenomic analysis of 203 primate fecal samples, including nine NHP species and humans, to comprehensively characterize their gut microbiota and ARGs. RESULTS: Our study reveals the prevailing phyla in primates as Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, Euryarchaeota, and Proteobacteria. The captive NHPs exhibited higher ARG abundance compared to their wild counterparts, with tetracycline and beta-lactam resistance genes prevailing. Notably, ARG subtypes in Trachypithecus leucocephalus (T. leucocephalus) residing in karst limestone habitats displayed a more dispersed distribution compared to other species. Interestingly, ARG profiles of NHPs clustered based on geographic location and captivity status. Co-occurrence network analysis revealed intricate correlations between ARG subtypes and bacterial taxa. Procrustes analysis unveiled a significant correlation between ARGs and microbial phylogenetic community structure. Taxonomic composition analysis further highlighted differences in microbial abundance among NHPs and humans. DISCUSSION: Our study underscores the impact of lifestyle and geographical location on NHP gut microbiota and ARGs, providing essential insights into the potential risks posed by NHPs to antibiotic resistance dissemination. This comprehensive analysis enhances our understanding of the interplay between NHPs and the gut resistome, offering a critical reference for future research on antibiotic resistance and host-microbe interactions.

Disease suppressiveness of soils to fungal root pathogens is typically induced in the field by repeated infections of the host plant and concomitant changes in the taxonomic composition and functional traits of the rhizosphere microbiome. Here, we studied this remarkable phenomenon for Bipolaris sorokiniana in two wheat cultivars differing in resistance to this fungal root pathogen. RESULTS: The results showed that repeated exposure of the susceptible wheat cultivar to the pathogen led to a significant reduction in disease severity after five successive growth cycles. Surprisingly, the resistant wheat cultivar, initially included as a control, showed the opposite pattern with an increase in disease severity after repeated pathogen exposure. Amplicon analyses revealed that the bacterial families Chitinophagaceae, Anaerolineaceae and Nitrosomonadaceae were associated with disease suppressiveness in the susceptible wheat cultivar; disease suppressiveness in the resistant wheat cultivar was also associated with Chitinophagaceae and a higher abundance of Comamonadaceae. Metagenome analysis led to the selection of 604 Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (BGCs), out of a total of 2,571 identified by AntiSMASH analysis, that were overrepresented when the soil entered the disease suppressive state. These BGCs are involved in the biosynthesis of terpenes, non-ribosomal peptides, polyketides, aryl polyenes and post-translationally modified peptides. CONCLUSION: Combining taxonomic and functional profiling we identified key changes in the rhizosphere microbiome during disease suppression. This illustrates how the host plant relies on the rhizosphere microbiome as the first line of defense to fight soil-borne pathogens. Microbial taxa and functions identified here can be used in novel strategies to control soil-borne fungal pathogens.

Inquiry of microbiota involvement in kidney stone disease (KSD) has largely focussed on potential oxalate handling abilities by gut bacteria and the increased association with antibiotic exposure. By systematically comparing the gut, urinary, and oral microbiota of 83 stone formers (SF) and 30 healthy controls (HC), we provide a unified assessment of the bacterial contribution to KSD. RESULTS: Amplicon and shotgun metagenomic sequencing approaches were consistent in identifying multi-site microbiota disturbances in SF relative to HC. Biomarker taxa, reduced taxonomic and functional diversity, functional replacement of core bioenergetic pathways with virulence-associated gene markers, and community network collapse defined SF, but differences between cohorts did not extend to oxalate metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that multi-site microbiota alteration is a hallmark of SF, and KSD treatment should consider microbial functional restoration and the avoidance of aberrant modulators such as poor diet and antibiotics where applicable to prevent stone recurrence. Video Abstract.

Shotgun metagenomic and 16S rDNA sequencing are commonly used methods to identify the taxonomic composition of microbial communities. Previously, we analysed the gut microbiota and intestinal pathogenic bacteria configuration of migratory seagulls by using 16S rDNA sequencing and culture methods. METHODS: To continue in-depth research on the gut microbiome and reveal the applicability of the two methods, we compared the metagenome and 16S rDNA amplicon results to further demonstrate the features of this animal. RESULTS: The number of bacterial species detected by metagenomics gradually increased from the phylum to species level, consistent with 16S rDNA sequencing. Several taxa were commonly shared by both sequencing methods. However, Escherichia, Shigella, Erwinia, Klebsiella, Salmonella, Escherichia albertii, Shigella sonnei, Salmonella enterica, and Shigella flexneri were unique taxa for the metagenome compared with Escherichia-Shigella, Hafnia-Obesumbacterium, Catellicoccus marimammalium, Lactococcus garvieae, and Streptococcus gallolyticus for 16S rDNA sequencing. The largest differences in relative abundance between the two methods were identified at the species level, which identified many pathogenic bacteria to humans using metagenomic sequencing. Pearson correlation analysis indicated that the correlation coefficient for the two methods gradually decreased with the refinement of the taxonomic levels. The high consistency of the correlation coefficient was identified at the genus level for the beta diversity of the two methods. CONCLUSIONS: In general, relatively consistent patterns and reliability could be identified by both sequencing methods, but the results varied following the refinement of taxonomic levels. Metagenomic sequencing was more suitable for the discovery and detection of pathogenic bacteria of gut microbiota in seagulls. Although there were large differences in the numbers and abundance of bacterial species of the two methods in terms of taxonomic levels, the patterns and reliability results of the samples were consistent.

Although antimicrobial use is a key selector for antimicrobial resistance, recent studies have suggested that the ecological context in which antimicrobials are used might provide important factors for the prediction of the emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance. METHODS: We used 1547 variables from the World Bank dataset consisting of socioeconomic, developmental, health, and nutritional indicators; data from a global sewage-based study on antimicrobial resistance (abundance of antimicrobial resistance genes [ARGs]); and data on antimicrobial usage computed from the ECDC database and the IQVIA database. We characterised and built models predicting the global resistome at an antimicrobial class level. We used a generalised linear mixed-effects model to estimate the association between antimicrobial usage and ARG abundance in the sewage samples; a multivariate random forest model to build predictive models for each antimicrobial resistance class and to select the most important variables for ARG abundance; logistic regression models to test the association between the predicted country-level antimicrobial resistance abundance and the country-level proportion of clinical resistant bacterial isolates; finite mixture models to investigate geographical heterogeneities in the abundance of ARGs; and multivariate finite mixture models with covariates to investigate the effect of heterogeneity in the association between the most important variables and the observed ARG abundance across the different country subgroups. We compared our predictions with available clinical phenotypic data from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program from eight antimicrobial classes and 12 genera from 56 countries. FINDINGS: Using antimicrobial use data from between Jan 1, 2016, and Dec 31, 2019, we found that antimicrobial usage was not significantly associated with the global ARG abundance in sewage (p=0·72; incidence rate ratio 1·02 [95% CI 0·92-1·13]), whereas country-specific World Bank's variables explained a large amount of variation. The importance of the World Bank variables differed between antimicrobial classes and countries. Generally, the estimated global ARG abundance was positively associated with the prevalence of clinical phenotypic resistance, with a strong association for bacterial groups in the human gut. The associations between bacterial groups and ARG abundance were positive and significantly different from zero for the aminoglycosides (three of the four of the taxa tested), β-lactam (all the six microbial groups), fluoroquinolones (seven of nine of the microbial groups), glycopeptide (one microbial group tested), folate pathway antagonists (four of five microbial groups), and tetracycline (two of nine microbial groups). INTERPRETATION: Metagenomic analysis of sewage is a robust approach for the surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in pathogens, especially for bacterial groups associated with the human gut. Additional studies on the associations between important socioeconomic, nutritional, and health factors and antimicrobial resistance should consider the variation in these associations between countries and antimicrobial classes. FUNDING: EU Horizon 2020 and Novo Nordisk Foundation.

The most widely used technologies for profiling microbial communities are 16S marker-gene sequencing and shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Interestingly, many microbiome studies have performed both sequencing experiments on the same cohort of samples. The two sequencing datasets often reveal consistent patterns of microbial signatures, highlighting the potential for an integrative analysis to improve power of testing these signatures. However, differential experimental biases, partially overlapping samples, and differential library sizes pose tremendous challenges when combining the two datasets. Currently, researchers either discard one dataset entirely or use different datasets for different objectives. METHODS: In this article, we introduce the first method of this kind, named Com-2seq, that combines the two sequencing datasets for testing differential abundance at the genus and community levels while overcoming these difficulties. The new method is based on our LOCOM model (Hu et al., 2022), which employs logistic regression for testing taxon differential abundance while remaining robust to experimental bias. To benchmark the performance of Com-2seq, we introduce two ad hoc approaches: applying LOCOM to pooled taxa count data and combining LOCOM p-values from analyzing each dataset separately. RESULTS: Our simulation studies indicate that Com-2seq substantially improves statistical efficiency over analysis of either dataset alone and works better than the two ad hoc approaches. An application of Com-2seq to two real microbiome studies uncovered scientifically plausible findings that would have been missed by analyzing individual datasets. CONCLUSIONS: Com-2seq performs integrative analysis of 16S and metagenomic sequencing data, which improves statistical efficiency and has the potential to accelerate the search of microbial communities and taxa that are involved in human health and diseases.

The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral reservoir remain poorly understood. RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research field. CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an effective cure for HIV.

In the American Gut Project Database, 361 individuals (without troubled by disease recently) with less than 6 h of sleep per day were obtained and matched with normal sleep time individuals according to gender, age, and BMI. Furthermore, the raw data of 16s rRNA in feces were downloaded and analyzed using QIIME2, and STAMP was used for data statistics. PICRUST2 was used for predicting the alteration of microbial function. RESULTS: The SSD did not affect the microbial α-diversity. SSD increased the abundance of the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the families Rikenellaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and S24-7, and decrased the Coriobacteriaceae. Moreover, PICRUST2 predicted that SSD affected 15 metabolic pathways. Subgroup analyses showed that SSD had more significant effects on the microbiota in normal-weight females. CONCLUSION: SSD substantially modifies the abundance of specific gut microbiota taxa, exerting a pronounced influence particularly on females, highlighting the need for further investigation into the bidirectional relationship between sleep patterns and gut microbiota.

Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging remain unknown. METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging. CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential therapeutic targets.

The gut-lung axis could be a potential therapeutic target for improving post-acute COVID-19 symptoms, and probiotics have been proposed as possible modulators. AIM: We conducted a pilot study to understand alterations in the gut-lung axis and to explore the effects of a probiotic in post-acute COVID-19 disease. METHODS: We included patients after severe COVID-19 disease (sCOV, n = 21) in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial to test the effect of a probiotic (Pro-Vi 5, Institute Allergosan, Graz, Austria) in a six-month intervention and used patients after mild disease (mCOV, n = 10) as controls, to compare the intestinal microbiome, metabolome, and patient-reported outcomes and biomarkers along the gut-lung axis at baseline and throughout probiotic intervention. RESULTS: Compared to mCOV patients, sCOV patients showed lower microbial richness, which was significantly improved by probiotic intervention. A reorganization of Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae taxa was observed in sCOV patients but remained unaffected by the intervention. Serum metabolome showed a dysregulation of lipoproteins in accordance with higher BMI and comorbidities in sCOV patients. HDL and LDL fractions/components were temporarily decreased in the probiotic group. Stool metabolome was altered at baseline in sCOV patients and an increase in L-DOPA after 3 months and butyrate after 6 months of intervention could be observed. Probiotics partially improved reduced quality of life and modulated altered immune responses in sCOV patients. Increased intestinal permeability at baseline remained unaffected. CONCLUSION: The study provides evidence of long-term alterations of the gut-lung axis after severe COVID-19 infection and suggests that probiotics can modulate the biomarkers of the gut-lung axis.

A total of 60 gut microbiome samples (16S rRNA sequences) were analyzed, with 44 from children with ASD and 16 from neurotypical children. Four machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Classification, Gradient Boosting, and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier) were applied to create eight classification models based on bacterial abundance at the genus level and KEGG pathways. Model accuracy was evaluated, and an external dataset was introduced to test model generalizability. RESULTS: The highest classification accuracy (80%) was achieved with Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier using genus-level taxa. The Random Forest model also performed well (78%) with KEGG pathways. When tested on an independent dataset, the model maintained high accuracy (79%), confirming its generalizability. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified significant microbial differences between neurotypical children and children with ASD. Machine learning classifiers, particularly Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier, achieved strong accuracy. Validation with external data demonstrated that the models could generalize across different datasets, highlighting their potential use.

There is a growing interest in understanding the association between the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration in an experimental colitis model. METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted. RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal linings. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

Tea leaf blight leads to an increase in bacterial diversity in the rhizosphere. Random processes dominate the assembly of abundant and rare taxa, while abundant taxa are also influenced by deterministic processes. In the co-occurrence network, the increase in bacterial community diversity mediated by tea cloud leaf blight enhances the stability of the network. Meanwhile, the proportion of positive correlation between rare taxa is relatively high, and the relationship between rare taxa and intermediate taxa is closer. This highly diverse bacteria community maintained the structure and stability of the community to a certain extent. CONCLUSION: The rare taxa in the rhizosphere and the rhizosphere bacterial community mediated by tea leaf blight have high diversity, which is of great significance for maintaining the stability of the rhizosphere bacterial ecological network. In the future, we will further explore the dynamic changes and interaction patterns of the species in the rhizosphere soil affected by tea tree diseases, and their ecological functions and importance in areas of habitat fragmentation. Overall, there are many microbial resources in the rhizosphere microbiota under the influence of plant diseases that can be used for agricultural practice. The results of this study will enrich the insights into ecodynamics of bacteria in karst areas, especially in karst tea gardens.

The association between alterations in the oral microbiome and hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) has been observed in previous studies. Our study, therefore, aimed to identify the structural changes in the oral microbiota and biomarkers in children with HFMD caused by enterovirus A 71 (EV-A71). METHODS: Children diagnosed with EV-A71 HFMD and healthy children recruited from April 2021 to September 2023 were included in the present study, and were categorized into EV-A71 and control groups, respectively. Oral swabs were collected and microbiota information was obtained using 16 S rRNA gene sequencing technology. Alpha-diversity and partial least squares discriminant analyses were conducted to compare microbial diversity, richness, and similarity between the two groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size was employed to identify microbial taxa with significant differences, and determined the key genera among them. RESULTS: The study included a total of 80 children, with 50 assigned to the EV-A71 group and 30 to the control group. No significant differences were found between the two groups in terms of age (2.2 ± 1.2 vs. 2.7 ± 1.2 years; age range: 1-5 years; P = 0.114) or sex (56% vs. 60% boys, P = 0.726). The oral microbiota structure in the EV-A71 group differed from that in the control group. The EV-A71 group showed significant reductions in both the Shannon index (P = 0.037) and the abundance-based coverage estimator (ACE) index (P < 0.001). The key genus changes were marked by a significant decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga (P = 0.002) and Leptotrichia (P = 0.033) in the EV-A71 group. CONCLUSION: In children with EV-A71 HFMD, the oral microbiota showed changes in composition, with a significant reduction in diversity and richness. The changes in key genera were a marked decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga and Leptotrichia.

Experimental kidney disease was created using adenine feeding and subtotal nephrectomy in rats, and by adenine feeding in mice. Loss of periodontal bone height was assessed using a dissecting microscope supported by micro-CT, light, confocal and electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. Salivary biochemistry was assessed using NMR spectroscopy. The oral microbiome was evaluated using culture-based and molecular methods, and the transmissibility of dysbiosis was assessed using co-caging and microbial transfer experiments into previously germ-free recipient mice. RESULTS: We demonstrate that experimental kidney disease causes a reproducible reduction of alveolar bone height, without gingival inflammation or overt hyperparathyroidism but with evidence of failure of bone formation at the periodontal crest. We show that kidney disease alters the biochemical composition of saliva and induces progressive dysbiosis of the oral microbiota, with microbial samples from animals with kidney disease displaying reduced overall bacterial growth, increased alpha diversity, reduced abundance of key components of the healthy oral microbiota such as Streptococcus and Rothia, and an increase in minor taxa including those from gram-negative phyla Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Co-housing diseased rats with healthy ones ameliorates the periodontal disease phenotype, whilst transfer of oral microbiota from mice with kidney disease causes periodontal disease in germ-free animals with normal kidney function. CONCLUSIONS: We advocate that periodontal disease should be regarded as a complication of kidney disease, initiated by oral dysbiosis through mechanisms independent of overt inflammation or hyperparathyroidism.

Male mice receiving pyridostigmine bromide (PB) orally, and controls were evaluated for symptoms of GWI at 8 weeks post-treatment. The Kansas criteria were adapted to assess behaviors associated with the following domains: gastrointestinal alterations, pain, mood, cognitive function, skin and respiratory disturbances. PB-treated subjects were classified into susceptible (GWI-S) or resilient (GWI-R). The status of the gut microbiome was assessed via analyses of the 16S rRNA gene and microbial-derived metabolites were evaluated with metabolomics tools. KEY FINDINGS: Our results indicate that application of the Kansas criteria to behavioral outcomes in PB-treated mice resulted in a GWI susceptibility rate of ~35 %, similar to the one reported in humans. The composition and structure of the gut microbiome was different in GWI-S subjects compared to both control and GWI-R mice at 8 weeks but differences in microbial community structure were observed prior to PB treatment between GWI-R and GWI-S mice. GWI-S subjects exhibited a pattern of differentially abundant bacterial taxa and microbial metabolites. SIGNIFICANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first preclinical report in which a stratification by susceptibility to GWI and its association with the gut microbiome is described. In light of the research conundrum that vulnerability to GWI represents, the use of tools that could provide further insight into this complex factor should be considered.

The infant gut microbiome undergoes rapid changes in the first year of life, supporting normal development and long-term health. While diet shapes this process, the role of fibers in complementary foods on gut microbiome maturation is poorly understood. OBJECTIVES: We explored how the transition from human milk to fibers in complementary foods shapes the taxonomic and functional maturation of the gut microbiome within the first year of life. METHODS: We assessed the longitudinal and cross-sectional development of infant gut microbiomes (N=68 infants) and metabolomes (N=33 infants) using linear mixed models to uncover their associations to dietary fibers and their food sources. Fiber intakes were assessed with 3-day food records (months 3,6,9,12) relying on CODEX-compliant fiber fraction values, and questionnaires tracked the overall complementary food introduction. Bacterial species were identified and quantified via MetaPhlAn2 from metagenomic data, and metabolomic profiles were obtained using four LC-MS methods. RESULTS: We identified 176 complementary food fiber-bacterial species associations. First plant-based fibers associated to microbiota compositions similar to breastfeeding, and further associated with aromatic amino acid metabolites, including 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (Total dietary fiber - Complementary foods (g) - β=3.50, CI 2.48-4.52, p=6.53x10-5). Distinct fibers from different food categories showed unique associations with specific bacterial taxa. Key species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitznii, associated with oat fibers (g/MJ, β=2.18, CI 1.36-2.84, p=6.12x10-6), reflective of maturing microbial communities. Fiber intake during weaning associated with shifts in metabolite profiles, including immunomodulatory metabolites, with fiber effects observed in a source- and timing-dependent manner, implicated in gradual microbiome diversification. CONCLUSIONS: Introducing complementary dietary fibers during the weaning period supports gut microbiome diversification and stabilization. Even minor dietary variations showed significant associations with microbial taxa and functions from the onset of weaning, highlighting the importance of infant dietary recommendations that support the gut microbiome maturation during early life. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01735123. Date of registration: November 24, 2012. https://www. CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT01735123.

The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome. METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA gene markers. RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the Eukaryotic community. CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

Airway microbiome has been linked to asthma heterogeneity, yet little is known about the associations between airway microbiota and type 2 (T2) asthma phenotype and severity. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the relationship of nasopharyngeal (NP) and induced sputum (IS) microbiota to the phenotypic features of T2 asthma. METHODS: NP and IS samples from subjects with T2 mild-to-moderate asthma (n=23) and severe asthma (n=21) and healthy controls (n=16) were analyzed. Bacterial microbiota and functional profiles were compared. The correlation between microbial communities and clinical as well as inflammatory features was examined in asthmatics of two statuses. RESULTS: Differences in NP and IS microbiota were associated with T2 asthma phenotype. Alterations in NP microbiota were more reflective of T2 inflammation and severity, with additional stratification of a subgroup characterized by significant elevations in T2 inflammatory biomarkers and reductions in bacterial richness and diversity (P < .05). Burkholderia-Caballeronia-Paraburkholderia, Ralstonia and Rhodococcus were identified as hub taxa within NP microbial network in T2 severe asthma, which were prevalent in the entire airway and involved in bacterial functions including inflammatory and steroid responses (P < .05). The composition and diversity of IS microbiota were complex, with Veillonella as the most altered genus, showing an increase with increasing asthma severity. CONCLUSION: Our work revealed the significant associations of microbiota perturbations throughout the entire respiratory tract to the extent of T2 inflammation, phenotype and severity in T2 asthma. The specific taxa identified invite further mechanistic investigations to unravel their possibility as biomarkers and therapeutic targets for T2 severe asthma.

Gut microbiome plays a significant role in longevity, and dysbiosis is indeed one of the hallmarks of aging. However, the causal relationship between gut microbiota and human longevity or aging remains elusive. METHODS: Our study assessed the causal relationships between gut microbiome and longevity using Mendelian Randomization (MR). Summary statistics for the gut microbiome were obtained from four genome-wide association study (GWAS) meta-analysis of the MiBioGen consortium (N = 18,340), Dutch Microbiome Project (N = 7738), German individuals (N = 8956), and Finland individuals (N = 5959). Summary statistics for Longevity were obtained from Five GWAS meta-analysis, including Human healthspan (N = 300,447), Longevity (N = 36,745), Lifespans (N = 1,012,240), Parental longevity (N = 389,166), and Frailty (one of the primary aging-linked physiological hallmarks, N = 175,226). RESULTS: Our findings reveal several noteworthy associations, including a negative correlation between Bacteroides massiliensis and longevity, whereas the genus Subdoligranulum and Alistipes, as well as species Alistipes senegalensis and Alistipes shahii, exhibited positive associations with specific longevity traits. Moreover, the microbial pathway of coenzyme A biosynthesis I, pyruvate fermentation to acetate and lactate II, and pentose phosphate pathway exhibited positive associations with two or more traits linked to longevity. Conversely, the TCA cycle VIII (helicobacter) pathway consistently demonstrated a negative correlation with lifespan and parental longevity. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings of this MR study indicated many significant associations between gut microbiome and longevity. These microbial taxa and pathways may potentially play a protective role in promoting longevity or have a suppressive effect on lifespan.

Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa (Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as antibiotic use.

This scoping review followed PRISMA-ScR guidelines and focused on primary research exploring the role of GUS within the gut microbiota related to cancer etiology and anti-cancer treatment. Comprehensive literature searches were conducted in PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science. RESULTS: GUS activity was only investigated in colorectal cancer (CRC), revealing increased fecal GUS activity, variations in the gut microbial composition, and GUS-contributing bacterial taxa in CRC patients versus controls. Irinotecan affects gastrointestinal (GI) health by increasing GUS expression and shifting gut microbial composition, particularly by enhancing the presence of GUS-producing bacteria, correlating with irinotecan-induced GI toxicities. GUS inhibitors (GUSi) can mitigate irinotecan's adverse effects, protecting the intestinal barrier and reducing diarrhea. CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first review to comprehensively analyze and summarize studies on the critical role of gut microbial GUS in cancer and anti-cancer treatment, particularly irinotecan. It underscores the potential of GUSi to reduce side effects and enhance treatment efficacy, highlighting the urgent need for further research to integrate GUS targeting into future anti-cancer treatment strategies.

Alcohol intake can alter gut microbiome, which may subsequently affect human health. However, limited population-based, prospective studies have investigated associations of habitual and recent alcohol intake with the gut microbiome, particularly among Black/African American individuals. OBJECTIVE: We examined the association of alcohol intake with gut microbiome in a predominantly low-income Black/African American population. METHODS: We investigated the dose- and type-specific associations of habitual and recent alcohol intake with the gut microbiome among 538 Black/African American adults (150 males and 388 females). Habitual and recent alcohol intakes were assessed at cohort baseline (2002-2009) and stool collection (2018-2021), respectively. Gut microbiome was profiled using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. Generalized linear models were employed to evaluate the associations between alcohol intakes and gut microbiome composition, with adjustments for sociodemographic characteristics, other lifestyle factors, and comorbidities. False discovery rate (FDR) <0.1 was considered statistically significant. RESULTS: The mean age at enrollment was 53.2 ± 7.7 y, with a mean interval of 13.8 y (range: 9.0-18.1 y) between baseline and stool sample collection. Recent alcohol intake was not significantly associated with microbial taxa abundance. However, habitual alcohol intake, both total amount and types of alcoholic beverages, showed significant associations with several microbial taxa abundance, primarily in males, including species within classes Clostridia, Bacilli, and Mahellia within Firmicutes. Specifically, total alcohol, beer, and red wine intakes were all inversely associated with genus MGYG-HGUT-02719 within class Clostridia (β = -2.26 to -0.09 per 1 drink/d increase). Red wine consumption was also inversely associated with the abundance of genera CAG-110, Oscillibacter, and Gemmiger within class Clostridia (β = -3.88 to -2.69), whereas positively associated with genus Absiella (β = 1.81) within class Bacilli. Most of these associations remained significant after additionally adjusting for BMI and baseline comorbidities. CONCLUSIONS: We identified gut microbial taxa associated with habitual alcohol intake among Black/African American males, although the magnitudes of these associations were generally small. Further research is needed to determine if these bacteria modify alcohol-disease relationships.

The site-of-disease microbiome and predicted metagenome were evaluated in a cross-sectional study involving people with presumptive tuberculous pericarditis. We also explored the interaction between C-reactive protein (CRP) and the microbiome. METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) provided pericardial fluid for sequencing and blood for CRP measurement. RESULTS: Pericardial fluid microbiota differed in β-diversity among people with definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous pericarditis. dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria-enriched vs. nTBs. HIV-positive dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium-, Methylobacterium-, and Leptothrix-enriched vs. HIV-negative dTBs. HIV-positive dTBs on ART were Mycobacterium- and Bifidobacterium-depleted vs. those not on ART. dTBs exhibited enrichment in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and mycobacterial metabolism pathways vs. nTBs. Additional non-pericardial involvement (pulmonary infiltrates) was associated with Mycobacterium-enrichment and Streptococcus-depletion. Mycobacterium reads were in 34 % (31/91) of dTBs, 8 % (2/25) of pTBs and 17 % (4/23) nTBs. People with CRP above (vs. below) the median value had different β-diversity (Pseudomonas-depleted). No correlation was found between enriched taxa in dTBs and CRP. CONCLUSIONS: Pericardial fluid microbial composition varies by tuberculosis status, HIV (and ART) status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The clinical significance, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires evaluation.

We retrospectively analyzed mNGS data from the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) of 83 pediatric ALRIs patients from 2019 to 2023. Microbial diversity and relative abundances of specific taxa were compared between survivor and non-survivor groups, as well as between varying severity levels. LEfSe was employed to identify key biomarkers related to survival and disease severity. RESULTS: Among the 83 patients, 68 survived and 15 died. Patients were also divided into a low severity group (n = 38) and a moderate-to-very-high severity group (n = 45) according to mPIRO score at admission. Significant differences in beta diversity were observed between the survival groups and across different severity levels. Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella exhibited higher abundances in both the survivor and low severity groups, suggesting their potential as predictors of better outcomes. Conversely, Enterococcus and Acinetobacter baumannii were more prevalent in the non-survivor and moderate-to-very-high severity groups. Additionally, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus mitis showed increased abundances in survivors. LEfSe further revealed that these microorganisms may predict outcomes and severity in ALRIs. CONCLUSION: Our findings underscore the complex relationship between lung microbiota and ALRIs, with specific microbial profiles associated with disease severity and clinical outcomes. This underscores the need for further research to explore and validate its prognostic predictive capacity. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

Previous research demonstrates that adopting, abandoning, and re-adopting (i.e., cycling) a healthy dietary pattern (HDP) improved, reverted, and re-improved cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors. In addition, changes in CVD risk factors are associated with dietary modifications of gut microbiota. OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess the effects of cycling an HDP on gut microbiota and CVD risk factors. METHODS: Retrospectively, we used data from a randomized controlled, crossover trial with three 3-week controlled dietary interventions, each separated by a 5-week period of participant-chosen, uncontrolled food intake. Seventeen participants (10 males, 7 females, age 26 ± 4 years old, BMI 23 ± 3 kg/m2) all consumed intervention diets that followed healthy U.S.-style dietary patterns. Gut microbiota composition and cardiovascular risk factors were measured before and after each HDP. RESULTS: Repeatedly adopting and abandoning an HDP led to a cycling pattern of changes in the gut microbial community and taxonomic composition. During the HDP cycles, relative abundances of several bacterial taxa (e.g., Collinsella, Mediterraneibacter, Romboutsia, and Dorea) decreased and returned to baseline repeatedly. Similar HDP cycling occurred for multiple CVD risk factors (i.e., serum total cholesterol and LDL-C concentrations). Consistent negative associations were observed between changes in Mediterraneibacter or Collinsella and serum total cholesterol/HDL-C ratio. CONCLUSIONS: These results support previous findings that HDP cycling affected multiple CVD risk factors and expand the HDP cycling phenomenon to include several bacterial taxa. Young adults are encouraged to adopt and sustain a healthy dietary pattern to improve cardiovascular health, potentially through modifying gut microbiota composition.

The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented. METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were performed. RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data. CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Disease-associated gut microbial modules were identified using statistical machine learning and co-abundance network analysis in controls, CD and ITB patients recruited as part of this study. Module reproducibility was reinvestigated through meta-network analysis encompassing >5400 bacteriomes and ~900 mycobiomes. Subsequently, >1600 Indian gut microbiomes were analyzed to identify a central-core gut microbiome of 46 taxa, whose abundances aided in the formulation of an India-specific Core Gut Microbiome Score (CGMS) to measure the degree of core retention. RESULTS: Both diseases witness similar patterns of alterations in [alpha]-diversity, characterized by a significant reduction in gut bacterial (i.e., bacterial/archaeal) diversity and a concomitant increase in the fungal [alpha]-diversity. Specific bacterial taxa, along with the diverging mycobiome enabled distinction between the diseases. Co-abundance network analysis of these taxa, validated by integrated meta-network analysis, revealed a 'disease-depleted' module, consistent across multiple cohorts, with >75% of this module constituting the central-core Indian gut microbiome. CGMS robustly assessed the core-microbiome loss across different stages of gut inflammatory disorders, in Indian and international cohorts. CONCLUSIONS: While the disease-specific gain of detrimental bacteria forms an important component of gut dysbiosis, loss of the core microbiome is a shared phenomenon contributing to various GI disorders.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is linked to host gut dysbiosis. Here we performed faecal gut microbiome sequencing to investigate SLE-pathogenic gut microbes and their potential mechanisms. METHODS: There were 134 healthy controls (HCs) and 114 SLE cases for 16 S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing and 97 HCs and 124 SLE cases for shotgun metagenomics. Faecal microbial changes and associations with clinical phenotypes were evaluated, and SLE-associated microbial genera were identified in amplicon analysis. Next, metagenomic sequencing was applied for accurate identification of microbial species and discovery of their metabolic pathways and immunogenic peptides both relevant to SLE. Finally, contribution of specific taxa to disease development was confirmed by oral gavage into lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice. RESULTS: SLE patients had gut microbiota richness reduction and composition alteration, particularly lupus nephritis and active patients. Proteobacteria/Bacteroidetes (P/B) ratio was remarkably up-regulated, and Escherichia was identified as the dominantly expanded genus in SLE, followed by metagenomics accurately located Escherichia coli and Escherichia unclassified species. Significant associations primarily appeared among Escherichia coli, metabolic pathways of purine nucleotide salvage or peptidoglycan maturation and SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI), and between multiple epitopes from Escherichia coli and disease activity or renal involvement phenotype. Finally, gavage with faecal Escherichia revealed that it upregulated lupus-associated serum traits and aggravated glomerular lesions in MRL/lpr mice. CONCLUSION: We characterize a novel SLE exacerbating Escherichia outgrowth and suggest its contribution to SLE procession may be partially associated with metabolite changes and cross-reactivity of gut microbiota-associated epitopes and host autoantigens. The findings could provide a deeper insight into gut Escherichia in the procession of SLE.

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) is one of the most efficient therapeutic options available to cure many hematological malignancies. However, severe complications derived from this procedure, including graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and infections, can limit its success and negatively impact survival. Previous studies have shown that alterations in the microbiome are associated with the development of allo-HSCT-derived complications. However, most studies relied on single techniques that can only analyze a unique aspect of the microbiome, which hinders our ability to understand how microbiome alterations drive allo-HSCT-associated diseases. RESULTS: Here, we have applied multiple "omic" techniques (16S rRNA and shotgun sequencing, targeted and un-targeted metabolomics) in combination with machine learning approaches to define the most significant microbiome changes following allo-HSCT at multiple modalities (bacterial taxa, encoded functions, and derived metabolites). In addition, multivariate approaches were applied to study interactions among the various microbiome modalities (the interactome). Our results show that the microbiome of transplanted patients exhibits substantial changes in all studied modalities. These include depletion of beneficial microbes, mainly from the Clostridiales order, loss of their bacterial encoded functions required for the synthesis of key metabolites, and a reduction in metabolic end products such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These changes were followed by an expansion of bacteria that frequently cause infections after allo-HSCT, including several Staphylococcus species, which benefit from the reduction of bacteriostatic SCFAs. Additionally, we found specific alterations in all microbiome modalities that distinguished those patients who subsequently developed GVHD, including depletion of anti-inflammatory commensals, protective reactive oxygen detoxifying enzymes, and immunoregulatory metabolites such as acetate or malonate. Moreover, extensive shifts in the homeostatic relationship between bacteria and their metabolic products (e.g., Faecalibacterium and butyrate) were detected mainly in patients who later developed GVHD. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified specific microbiome changes at different modalities (microbial taxa, their encoded genes, and synthetized metabolites) and at the interface between them (the interactome) that precede the development of complications associated with allo-HSCT. These identified microbial features provide novel targets for the design of microbiome-based strategies to prevent diseases associated with stem cell transplantation. Video Abstract.

Prior efforts have revealed changes in gut microbiome, circulating metabolome, and multimodal neuroimaging features in cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD). However, there is a paucity of research integrating the multi-omic information to characterize the role of the microbiota-gut-brain axis in CSVD. METHODS: We collected gut microbiome, fecal and blood metabolome, multimodal magnetic resonance imaging data from 37 CSVD patients with white matter hyperintensities and 46 healthy controls. Between-group comparison was performed to identify the differential gut microbial taxa, followed by performance of multi-stage microbiome-metabolome-neuroimaging-neuropsychology correlation analyses in CSVD patients. RESULTS: Our data showed both depleted and enriched gut microbes in CSVD patients. Among the differential microbes, Haemophilus and Akkermansia were associated with a range of metabolites enriched for Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis pathway. Furthermore, the affected metabolites were associated with neuroimaging measures involving gray matter morphology, spontaneous intrinsic brain activity, white matter integrity, and global structural network topology, which were in turn related to cognition and emotion in CSVD patients. CONCLUSION: Our findings provide an integrative framework to understand the pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the interplay between gut microbiota dysbiosis and CSVD, highlighting the potential of targeting the microbiota-gut-brain axis as a therapeutic strategy in CSVD patients.

In this study, 12 CTEPH fresh thrombi and 12 organized thrombi were collected from 14 patients with CTEPH. Metagenomic sequencing was employed to explore the genomic information of all microorganisms in the thrombus samples. RESULTS: Our data demonstrated a diverse range of microorganisms in CTEPH thrombi, whether fresh or organized. Notably, a considerable proportion (54.7 %) of sequencing data could not be classified into the relative microbial taxa, highlighting the complexity and novelty of the thrombus ecosystem. Although there were no significant differences in microbial community structure between the two groups, the abundance of dominant microbial species varied. Leuconostoc sp. DORA 2, Staphylococcus aureus, and Aliidongia dinghuensis were common dominant species in CTEPH thrombus. Organized thrombus significantly increased the relative abundance of Staphylococcus aureus, which was confirmed to effectively distinguish between organized and fresh thrombi by LeFSe analysis and random forest analysis. Functional annotation using both the KEGG and eggNOG databases revealed that organized thrombi exhibit stronger metabolic functions, particularly in amino acid metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that microbial composition and function may play an important role in thrombus organization. Targeting inflammation to prevent thrombosis presents promising opportunities for further research in this area.

Lifestyle plays an important role in shaping the gut microbiome. However, its contributions to the oral microbiome remain less clear, due to the confounding effects of geography and methodology in investigations of populations studied to date. Furthermore, while the oral microbiome seems to differ between foraging and industrialized populations, we lack insight into whether transitions to and away from agrarian lifestyles shape the oral microbiota. Given the growing interest in so-called "vanishing microbiomes" potentially being a risk factor for increased disease prevalence in industrialized populations, it is important that we distinguish lifestyle from geography in the study of microbiomes across populations. RESULTS: Here, we investigate salivary microbiomes of 63 Nepali individuals representing a spectrum of lifestyles: foraging, subsistence farming (individuals that transitioned from foraging to farming within the last 50 years), agriculturalists (individuals that have transitioned to farming for at least 300 years), and industrialists (expatriates that immigrated to the USA within the last 20 years). We characterize the role of lifestyle in microbial diversity, identify microbes that differ between lifestyles, and pinpoint specific lifestyle factors that may be contributing to differences in the microbiomes across populations. Contrary to prevailing views, when geography is controlled for, oral microbiome alpha diversity does not differ significantly across lifestyles. Microbiome composition, however, follows the gradient of lifestyles from foraging through agrarianism to industrialism, supporting the notion that lifestyle indeed plays a role in the oral microbiome. Relative abundances of several individual taxa, including Streptobacillus and an unclassified Porphyromonadaceae genus, also mirror lifestyle. Finally, we identify specific lifestyle factors associated with microbiome composition across the gradient of lifestyles, including smoking and grain sources. CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that by studying populations within Nepal, we can isolate an important role of lifestyle in determining oral microbiome composition. In doing so, we highlight the potential contributions of several lifestyle factors, underlining the importance of carefully examining the oral microbiome across lifestyles to improve our understanding of global microbiomes. Video Abstract.

Ticks are vectors of numerous pathogens, with their bacterial composition, abundance, diversity, and interaction influencing both their growth and disease transmission efficiency. Despite the abundance of ticks in Inner Mongolia, China, comprehensive data on their microbial communities are lacking. This study aims to analyze the microbial communities within ticks from Inner Mongolia to inform innovative control strategies for interrupting pathogen transmission. METHODS: Tick samples were collected from animals and vegetation in multiple locations across Inner Mongolia and stored at - 80 °C. Ticks were identified using morphological keys and molecular biology methods. Full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed on collected samples. Bacterial community composition and diversity were mainly analyzed using bioinformatic tools such as QIIME, phyloseq, and DESeq2. Alpha diversity was assessed using Chao1, ACE, and Shannon indices, while beta diversity was evaluated using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices. LEfSe analysis was applied to identify taxa associated with ecological and biological variables. RESULTS: A total of 5,048,137 high-quality read counts were obtained, forming an average of 789.3 OTUs per sample. Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes were the most dominant phyla. Bacterial community composition varied significantly with geography, with Dermacentor nuttalli showing a higher abundance of Rickettsia in Xilingol League, while other regions had different dominant genera. The microbial community also differed based on the feeding status of ticks. Additionally, the microbiota of engorged ticks showed organ specificity. Pathogen detection efforts revealed the presence of nine pathogens across all three tick species. D. nuttalli was found to carry a significantly higher burden of pathogenic bacteria, making it the most potentially threatening tick species in Inner Mongolia. CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights significant variations in tick microbiomes influenced by geographic location, feeding status, and tick species. It underscores the importance of enhancing tick and tick-borne disease surveillance in Inner Mongolia for early detection and control of emerging pathogens.

We aimed to investigate the ecological modifications of pathogen population density in soil, disease occurrence rate, and microbiota community shifting during ginseng monoculture to better understand the tripartite social relationships in the monoculture system. To achieve the study's objectives, a long-term monoculture of ginseng was established. The microbial diversity and community structure were analyzed using high-throughput sequencing, and the pathogen population density and disease occurrence rate were determined using qPCR and observation. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The results showed that the initial rhizosphere bacterial community of ginseng had already collapsed before the development of the root rot disease. The study also identified the crucial role of soil-borne pathogens in causing disease and the loss of initial keystone taxa populations in the early stages of monoculture. Our study revealed a novel aspect of soil microbiota dynamics during ginseng monoculture, with seven distinct microbes (Beijerinckiaceae, Comamonadaceae, Devosiaceae, Rhizobiaceae, Sphingobacteriaceae, Sphingomonadaceae, and Xanthomonadaceae) participating in soil nitrogen metabolism as an 'initial community' that regulates root rot disease through nutritional competition. The findings contribute to ecological research on disease-suppressiveness soil, disease management, and sustainable agriculture.

Recent studies had explored that gut microbiota was associated with personality traits through the gut-brain axis. Nevertheless, the fundamental causality remained obscure. METHODS: Mendelian randomization (MR) was used to investigate the causal relationship between gut microbiota, metabolites and neuroticism-related traits. Summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) was utilized to identify genes associated pleiotropically with microbial taxa. RESULTS: MR analyses identified reliable causal evidence of 20 bacterial taxa related to neuroticism and its worry or depressed affect sub-cluster. A higher relative abundance of the Ruminococcus gauvreauii genus was associated with a higher risk of neuroticism [odds ratio (OR) = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.06, P = 2.85 × 10-3], depressed affect [OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.06, P = 5.50 × 10-3] and worry (OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.06, P = 7.81 × 10-4), respectively. We identified the probes tagging CPSF1, that showed pleiotropic association with Ruminococcus gauvreauii in brain or colon tissues. Finally, we provided evidence that Ruminococcus gauvreauii present causal association with the neurotransmitter such as glutamine and glutamate. CONCLUSIONS: This study implied a causal relationship between the gut microbiome composition, metabolites and neuroticism, thus providing novel insights into the gut microbiota-mediated development mechanism of neuroticism.

Cervical ripening is a multifactorial outcome, and the association between cervical ripening and vaginal microbiota remains unexplored in term primiparous women. A new sequencing technology, microbiome 2bRAD sequencing (2bRAD-M) that provides a higher level of species discrimination compared to amplicon sequencing. We applied 2bRAD-M to analyze the vaginal microbiota in a population with variations in cervical ripeness and to explore potential microbiota factors influencing cervical ripening. METHODS: A total of 30 full-term primigravid women participated in this study, with 15 belonging to the low scoring group of cervical ripeness and 15 to the high scoring group. Clinical information was collected from the participants, and the vaginal microbiota and community structure of both groups were analyzed using 2bRAD-M sequencing. Microbiota diversity and differential analyses were conducted to explore potential factors influencing cervical ripening. RESULTS: A total of 605 species were detected. There was no difference in vaginal microbiota diversity between the two groups, and the vaginal microbial composition was structurally similar. In the two groups, Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus iners were identified as the two pivotal species through random forest analysis. Concurrent, extensive and close connections between species within the two groups were observed in the correlation analysis, influencing the aforementioned two species. Pairwise comparisons showed that Sphingomonas (P = 0.0017) and three others were abundant in high scoring group, while Alloprevotella (P = 0.0014), Tannerella (P = 0.0033), Bacteroides (P = 0.0132), Malassezia (P = 0.0296), Catonella (P = 0.0353) and Pseudomonas (P = 0.0353) and so on showed higher abundance in low scoring group. Linear discriminant analysis effect size identified 29 discriminative feature taxa. CONCLUSION: For the first time, vaginal microbiota was sequenced using 2bRAD-M. With a relatively simple structure, a more stable vaginal microbiota is associated with higher cervical ripeness, and certain microorganisms, such as Sphingomonas, may play a beneficial role in cervical ripening.

Prenatal and postpartum depression may be influenced by the composition of host associated microbiomes. As such, the objective of this study was to elucidate the relationship between the human gut or vaginal microbiomes in pregnancy with prenatal or postpartum depression. METHODS: 140 female participants were recruited at their first prenatal visit and completed the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) to screen for depression and anxiety, in addition the EPDS was completed one month postpartum. Vaginal and stool biospecimens were collected in the third trimester, analyzed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and assessed for alpha and beta diversity. Individual taxa differences and clustering using the k-medoids algorithm enabled community state type classification. RESULTS: Participants with higher postpartum EPDS scores had higher species richness and lower abundance of L. crispatus in the vaginal microbiota compared to those with lower EPDS scores. Participants with a higher prenatal EPDS score had lower species richness of the gut microbiome. Participants with a vaginal community state type dominated by L. iners had the highest mean prenatal EPDS scores, whereas postpartum EPDS scores were similar regardless of prenatal vaginal state type. LIMITATIONS: Our small sample size and participant's self-report bias limits generalizability of results. CONCLUSIONS: Depression in the prenatal and postpartum period is associated with the composition and diversity of the gut and vaginal microbiomes in the third trimester of pregnancy. These results provide a foundational understanding of the microbial relationships between maternal health and depression for identifying potential therapeutic treatments.

Low birth weight (LBW; <2,500 g) affects approximately 15 to 20 percent of global births annually and is associated with suboptimal child development. Recent studies suggest a link between the maternal gut microbiome and poor obstetric and perinatal outcomes. The goal of this study was to examine relationships between maternal microbial taxa, fecal metabolites, and maternal anthropometry on incidence of LBW in resource-limited settings. METHODS: This was a secondary analysis of the Women First trial conducted in a semi-rural region of Guatemala. Maternal weight was measured at 12 and 34 weeks (wk) of gestation. Infant anthropometry measures were collected within 48 h of delivery. Maternal fecal samples at 12 and 34 weeks were used for microbiome (16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing) and metabolomics analysis (34 wk). Linear mixed models using the MaAslin2 package were utilized to assess changes in microbiome associated with LBW. Predictive models using gradient boosted machines (XGBoost) were developed using the H2o.ai engine. RESULTS: No differences in β-diversity were observed at either time point between mothers with LBW infants relative to normal weight (NW) infants. Simpson diversity at 12 and 34 weeks was lower in mothers with LBW infants. Notable differences in genus-level abundance between LBW and NW mothers (p < 0.05) were observed at 12 weeks with increasing abundances of Barnesiella, Faecalibacterium, Sutterella, and Bacterioides. At 34 weeks, there were lower abundances of Magasphaera, Phascolarctobacterium, and Turicibacter and higher abundances of Bacteriodes, and Fusobacterium in mothers with LBW infants. Fecal metabolites related to bile acids, tryptophan metabolism and fatty acid related metabolites changed in mothers with LBW infants. Classification models to predict LBW based on maternal anthropometry and predicted microbial functions showed moderate performance. CONCLUSION: Collectively, the findings indicate that alterations in the maternal microbiome and metabolome were associated with LBW. Future research should target functional and predictive roles of the maternal gut microbiome in infant birth outcomes including birthweight.

Therefore, we conducted a study to investigate the alterations in fecal microbiome composition in wild type (WT) and Plin5-deficient (Plin5 -/-) mice models of MAFLD and MAFLD-induced HCC (MAFLD-HCC). We utilized 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis to profile the composition of gut bacteria in fecal samples. RESULTS: Notably, we discovered that the absence of Plin5 alone is already associated with changes in gut microbiota composition. Moreover, feeding the mice a Western diet (WD) resulted in additional microbial alterations. Interestingly, Plin5 -/- animals exhibited an enrichment of the beneficial taxa Lactobacillus in both animal models. DISCUSSION: Our findings identify Plin5 as a major regulator of gut microbiota during the development of MAFLD and MAFLD-HCC.

Mosquitoes serve as vectors for numerous pathogens, posing significant health risks to humans and animals. Understanding the complex interactions within mosquito microbiota is crucial for deciphering vector-pathogen dynamics and developing effective disease management strategies. Here, we investigated the nested patterns of Wolbachia endosymbionts and Escherichia-Shigella within the microbiota of laboratory-reared Culex pipiens f. molestus and Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes. We hypothesized that Wolbachia would exhibit a structured pattern reflective of its co-evolved relationship with both mosquito species, while Escherichia-Shigella would display a more dynamic pattern influenced by environmental factors. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed different microbial compositions between the two mosquito species, although some microorganisms were common to both. Network analysis revealed distinct community structures and interaction patterns for these bacteria in the microbiota of each mosquito species. Escherichia-Shigella appeared prominently within major network modules in both mosquito species, particularly in module P4 of Cx. pipiens f. molestus, interacting with 93 nodes, and in module Q3 of Cx. quinquefasciatus, interacting with 161 nodes, sharing 55 nodes across both species. On the other hand, Wolbachia appeared in disparate modules: module P3 in Cx. pipiens f. molestus and a distinct module with a single additional taxon in Cx. quinquefasciatus, showing species-specific interactions and no shared taxa. Through computer simulations, we evaluated how the removal of Wolbachia or Escherichia-Shigella affects network robustness. In Cx. pipiens f. molestus, removal of Wolbachia led to a decrease in network connectivity, while Escherichia-Shigella removal had a minimal impact. Conversely, in Cx. quinquefasciatus, removal of Escherichia-Shigella resulted in decreased network stability, whereas Wolbachia removal had minimal effect. CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to our hypothesis, the findings indicate that Wolbachia displays a more dynamic pattern of associations within the microbiota of Culex pipiens f. molestus and Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes, than Escherichia-Shigella. The differential effects on network robustness upon Wolbachia or Escherichia-Shigella removal suggest that these bacteria play distinct roles in maintaining community stability within the microbiota of the two mosquito species.

This systematic review used PRISMA guidelines to identify peer-reviewed articles on schistosomiasis and its interactions with the host microbiome, using multiple databases and Google Scholar, providing a robust dataset for analysis. The study utilized Meta-Mar v3.5.1; descriptive tests, random-effects models, and subgroups were analyzed for the interaction between Schistosomiasis and the microbiome. Forest plots, Cochran's Q test, and Higgins' inconsistency statistic (I2) were used to assess heterogeneity. RESULTS: The human Schistosoma species were observed to be associated with various bacterial species isolated from blood, stool, urine, sputum, skin, and vaginal or cervical samples. A meta-analysis of the interaction between schistosomiasis and the host microbiome, based on 31 studies, showed 29,784 observations and 5871 events. The pooled estimates indicated a significant association between schistosomiasis and changes in the microbiome of infected individuals. There was considerable heterogeneity with variance effect sizes (p < 0.0001). Subgroup analysis of Schistosoma species demonstrated that S. haematobium was the most significant contributor to the overall heterogeneity, accounting for 62.1% (p < 0.01). S. mansoni contributed 13.0% (p = 0.02), and the coinfection of S. haematobium and S. mansoni accounted for 16.8% of the heterogeneity (p < 0.01), contributing to the variability seen in the pooled analysis. Similarly, praziquantel treatment (RR = 1.68, 95% CI: 1.07-2.64) showed high heterogeneity (Chi2 = 71.42, df = 11, p < 0.01) and also indicated that Schistosoma infections in males (RR = 1.46, 95% CI: 0.00 to 551.30) and females (RR = 2.09, 95% CI: 0.24 to 18.31) have a higher risk of altering the host microbiome. CONCLUSIONS: Schistosomiasis significantly disrupts the host microbiota across various bodily sites, leading to increased susceptibility to different bacterial taxa such as E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Mycobacterium species (M. tuberculosis and M. leprae). This disruption enables these bacteria to produce toxic metabolites, which in turn cause inflammation and facilitate the progression of disease. The impact of schistosomiasis on the vaginal microbiome underscores the necessity for gender-specific approaches to treatment and prevention. Effective management of female genital schistosomiasis (FGS) requires addressing both the parasitic infection and the resulting microbiome imbalances. Additionally, praziquantel-treated individuals have different microbiome compositions compared to individuals with no praziquantel treatment. This suggests that combining praziquantel treatment with probiotics could potentially decrease the disease severity caused by an altered microbiome.

Understanding the interaction between environmental conditions, crop yields, and soil health is crucial for sustainable agriculture in a changing climate. Management practices to limit disease are a balancing act. For example, in potato production, dry conditions favour common scab (Streptomyces spp.) and wet conditions favour blackleg disease (Pectobacterium spp.). The exact mechanisms involved and how these link to changes in the soil microbiome are unclear. Our objectives were to test how irrigation management and bacterial pathogen load in potato seed stocks impact: (i) crop yields; (ii) disease development (blackleg or common scab); and (iii) soil microbial community dynamics. METHODS: We used stocks of seed potatoes with varying natural levels of Pectobacterium (Jelly [high load], Jelly [low load] and Estima [Zero - no Pectobacterium]). Stocks were grown under four irrigation regimes that differed in the timing and level of watering. The soil microbial communities were profiled using amplicon sequencing at 50% plant emergence and at harvest. Generalised linear latent variable models and an annotation-free mathematical framework approach (ensemble quotient analysis) were then used to show the interacting microbes with irrigation regime and Pectobacterium pathogen levels. RESULTS: Irrigation increased blackleg symptoms in the plots planted with stocks with low and high levels of Pectobacterium (22-34%) but not in the zero stock (2-6%). However, withholding irrigation increased common scab symptoms (2-5%) and reduced crop yields. Irrigation did not impact the composition of the soil microbiome, but planting stock with a high Pectobacterium burden resulted in an increased abundance of Planctomycetota, Anaerolinea and Acidobacteria species within the microbiome. Ensemble quotient analysis highlighted the Anaerolinea taxa were highly associated with high levels of Pectobacterium in the seed stock and blackleg symptoms in the field. CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that planting seed stocks with a high Pectobacterium burden alters the abundance of specific microbial species within the soil microbiome and suggest that managing pathogen load in seed stocks could substantially affect soil communities, affecting crop health and productivity. Video Abstract.

Oral, stool and, vaginal samples were self-collected at a single time point for healthy controls, and preoperatively for patients undergoing laparoscopy. Samples underwent 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, followed by bioinformatics analysis. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Compositional differences between cohorts as identified by diversity analyses, and differentially abundant microbial taxa, as identified by LEfSE analysis. RESULTS: The composition of the oral (adjusted p = 0.003), and stool (adjusted p = 0.042) microbiota is different between the three cohorts. Differentially abundant taxa are present within each cohort as identified by LEfSE analysis. Particularly, Fusobacterium was enriched in the oral samples of patients with moderate/severe endometriosis. CONCLUSIONS: Taxonomic and compositional differences were found between the microbiota in the mouth, gut and, vagina of patients with and without endometriosis and healthy controls. Fusobacterium was enriched in patients with moderate/severe endometriosis. Fusobacterium is noted as a key pathogen in periodontal disease, a common comorbidity in endometriosis. These findings suggest a role for the oral, stool and, vaginal microbiome in endometriosis, and present potential for microbial-based treatments and the design of a diagnostic swab.

Maternal undernutrition is the most common cause of fetal growth restriction (FGR) worldwide. FGR increases morbidity and mortality during infancy, as well as contributes to adult-onset diseases including obesity and type 2 diabetes. The role of the maternal or offspring microbiome in growth outcomes following FGR is not well understood. METHODS: FGR was induced by 30% maternal calorie restriction (CR) during the second half of gestation in C57BL/6 mice. Pup weights were obtained on day of life 0, 1, and 7 and ages 3, 4 and 16 weeks. Fecal pellets were collected from pregnant dams at gestational day 18.5 and from offspring at ages 3 and 4 weeks of age. Bacterial genomic DNA was used for amplification of the V4 variable region of the 16S rRNA gene. Multivariable associations between maternal CR and taxonomic abundance were assessed using the MaAsLin2 package. Associations between microbial taxa and offspring outcomes were performed using distance-based redundancy analysis and Pearson correlations. RESULTS: FGR pups weighed about 20% less than controls. Beta but not alpha diversity differed between control and CR dam microbiomes. CR dams had lower relative abundance of Turicibacter, Flexispira, and Rikenella, and increased relative abundance of Parabacteroides and Prevotella. Control and FGR offspring microbiota differed by beta diversity at ages 3 and 4 weeks. At 3 weeks, FGR offspring had decreased relative abundance of Akkermansia and Sutterella and increased relative abundance of Anaerostipes and Paraprevotella. At 4 weeks, FGR animals had decreased relative abundance of Allobaculum, Sutterella, Bifidobacterium, and Lactobacillus, among others, and increased relative abundance of Turcibacter, Dorea, and Roseburia. Maternal Helicobacter abundance was positively associated with offspring weight. Akkermansia abundance at age 3 and 4 weeks was negatively associated with adult weight. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate gut microbial dysbiosis in pregnant dams and offspring at two timepoints following maternal calorie restriction. Additional research is needed to test for functional roles of the microbiome in offspring growth outcomes.

There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that antidepressant drugs (ADs) alter the gut microbiome of persons with depressive disorders. Herein, we aim to investigate the gut microbial profile of AD-treated animal models of depression (MoD) and persons with major depressive disorder (MDD). METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis investigating the gut microbiome community-level diversity and relative abundance of microbial taxa in AD-treated animal MoD and persons with MDD. RESULTS: 24 human studies (898 participants) and 48 animal studies (849 subjects) were identified. Nonsignificant differences in gut microbial richness were observed between AD-treated and nonmedicated animals and humans. Beta diversity analysis in animals shows that AD intake is linked to a distinct gut microbial profile, a result not observed in humans. Consistent depletion of the genera Faecalibacterium and Parasutterella, along with enrichment of Bifidobacterium, was observed in AD-treated persons with MDD. In AD-treated animals, AD intake was associated with depletion of Flavobacterium and Adlercreutzia, and enrichment of Parabacteroides. LIMITATIONS: The studies in our review were heterogeneous in their participant population, dietary intake, type of ADs used, length and dosing of AD treatment, and frequency and time of fecal sample collection. CONCLUSION: ADs are associated with some changes to the gut microbiome. Future studies should evaluate the gut microbiome profiles between depressive disorder diagnoses that may reveal potential differences and predictors of AD response, as well as new combinatorial therapeutics with agents (e.g., specific-strain probiotic adjunctive treatment) that can ameliorate micro-composition gut dysbiosis.

Microbiome was profiled (16S rRNA sequencing) in feces from 196 children with CD. Sixty participants also provided samples after 18 months. Mural inflammation (Pediatric Inflammatory Crohn's Magnetic Resonance Enterography Index, PICMI), the simple endoscopic score for CD, and the weighted pediatric Crohn's disease activity index (wPCDAI) were assessed. Fecal calprotectin, plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), and fecal water content (FWC), a proxy of gastrointestinal transit time, were measured too. RESULTS: Microbiome α diversity, clustering, and differential taxa were related to disease status, but varied remarkably by disease activity measure used. The strongest relationships between microbiome and disease activity status were observed using wPCDAI; fewer or no relationships were seen using more objective measures like PICMI. Taxa predictive of disease activity status were dependent on the disease activity measure used with negligible overlap. Active disease was associated with more pathobionts (eg, Viellonella, Enterobacterales) and fewer fiber-fermenting organisms. The effect FWC had on microbiome superseded the effect of active disease for all disease activity measures, particularly with wPCDAI. Accounting for FWC, the differences in microbial signatures explained by disease activity status were attenuated or lost. CONCLUSIONS: In CD, microbiome signatures fluctuate depending on the measure used to assess disease severity; several of these signals might be secondary disease effects linked with changes in gut motility in active disease. PICMI appears to be less influenced when studying relationships between microbiome and mural inflammation in CD.

The rhizosphere microbiome is critical for promoting plant growth and mitigating soil-borne pathogens. However, its role in fighting soil-borne virus-induced diseases, such as wheat yellow mosaic virus (WYMV) transmitted by Polymyxa graminis zoospores, remains largely underexplored. In this study, we hypothesized that during viral infections, plant microbiomes engage in critical interactions with plants, with key microbes playing vital roles in maintaining plant health. Our research aimed to identify microbial taxa that not only suppress the disease but also boost wheat yield by using a blend of techniques, including field surveys, yield assessments, high-throughput sequencing of plant and soil microbiomes, microbial isolation, hydroponic experiments, and transcriptome sequencing. RESULTS: We found that, compared with roots and leaves, the rhizosphere microbiome showed a better performance in predicting wheat yield and the prevalence of P. graminis and WYMV across the three WYMV-impacted regions in China. Using machine learning, we found that healthy rhizospheres were marked with potentially beneficial microorganisms, such as Sphingomonas and Allorhizobium-Neorhizobium-Parararhizobium-Rhizobium, whereas diseased rhizospheres were associated with a higher prevalence of potential pathogens, such as Bipolaris and Fusicolla. Structural equation modeling showed that these biomarkers both directly and indirectly impacted wheat yield by modulating the rhizosphere microbiome and P. graminis abundance. Upon re-introduction of two key healthy rhizosphere biomarkers, Sphingomonas azotifigens and Rhizobium deserti, into the rhizosphere, wheat growth and health were enhanced. This was attributed to the up-regulation of auxin and cytokinin signaling pathways and the regulation of jasmonic acid and salicylic acid pathways during infections. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study revealed the critical role of the rhizosphere microbiome in combating soil-borne viral diseases, with specific rhizosphere microbes playing key roles in this process. Video Abstract.

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease, and its etiology is still unclear. There is increasing evidence suggesting that microorganisms may trigger psoriasis. However, the relationship between psoriasis and oral microbiota remains poorly understood. Our aim is to identify differences in the composition and diversity of the oral microbiota between patients with psoriasis and healthy controls, and to discover oral microbial markers for assessing the severity of psoriasis. METHODS: This study recruited 20 psoriasis patients and 20 healthy individuals, collecting their saliva to analyze the composition of the oral microbiota in psoriasis patients. We employed 16S rRNA sequencing technology and utilized various methods for oral microbiome analysis, including the Shannon Index, Gini-Simpson Index, Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA), non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS), Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size (LEfSe), Wilcoxon test, and Spearman's rank correlation. RESULTS: The results showed that the alpha diversity of oral microbiota was higher in psoriasis patients. The relative abundances of certain bacterial taxa differed between psoriasis and healthy individuals, including Prevotella, Prevotella 7 and Porphyromonas gingivalis, which are increased in psoriasis. We also found a positive correlation between Alloprevotella, Porphyromonas, and Neisseria with the severity of psoriasis, while Veillonella showed a negative correlation. CONCLUSION: In summary, this study found significant changes in the composition of the oral microbiota in patients with psoriasis. Some oral bacteria are associated with psoriasis severity. It provides a new perspective on the relationship between the oral microbiota and psoriasis.

Lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis (LDS), characterized as degeneration of the intervertebral disc and structural changes of the facet joints, is a condition with varying degrees of instability that may lead to pain, canal stenosis, and subsequent surgical intervention. However, the etiology of LDS remains inconclusive. Gut microbiome dysbiosis may stimulate systemic inflammation in various disorders. However, the role of such dysbiosis upon spine health remains under-studied. The current study assessed the association of gut microbiome dysbiosis in symptomatic patients with or without LDS. METHODS: A cross-sectional analysis within the framework of a prospective study was performed. DNA was extracted from fecal samples collected from adult symptomatic patients with (n = 21) and without LDS (n = 12). Alpha and beta diversity assessed differences in fecal microbial community between groups. Taxon-by-taxon analysis identified microbial features with differential relative abundance between groups. Subject demographics and imaging parameters were also assessed. RESULTS: There was no significant group differences in age, sex, race, body mass index, smoking/alcohol history, pain profiles, spinopelvic alignment, and Modic changes (p >0.05). LDS subjects had significantly higher disc degeneration severity (p = 0.018) and alpha diversity levels compared to non-LDS subjects (p = 0.002-0.003). Significant differences in gut microbial community structure were observed between groups (p = 0.046). Subjects with LDS exhibited distinct differences at the phylum level, with a significantly higher Firmicutes to Bacteroidota ratio compared to non-LDS (p = 0.003). Differential relative abundance analysis identified six taxa with significant differences between the two groups, with LDS demonstrating an increase in putative pro-inflammatory bacteria (Dialister, CAG-352) and a decrease in anti-inflammatory bacteria (Slackia, Escherichia-Shigella). CONCLUSION: This study is the first to report a significant association of gut microbiome dysbiosis and LDS in symptomatic patients, noting pro-inflammatory bacterial taxa. This work provides a foundation for future studies addressing the role of the gut microbiome in association with spine health and disease.

We conducted a cross-sectional study with 24 participants, including patients with AA of varying severities and healthy controls. Scalp microbial communities were analyzed using swab samples and ion torrent sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene across multiple hypervariable regions. We explored correlations among bacterial abundance, microbiome metabolic pathways, and circulating inflammatory markers. RESULTS: Our findings reveal significant dysbiosis in the scalp microbiota of patients with AA compared to healthy controls. Severe AA cases had an increased presence of pro-inflammatory microbial taxa like Proteobacteria, whereas milder cases had higher levels of anti-inflammatory Actinobacteria. Notable species differences included abundant gram-negative bacteria such as Alistipes inops and Bacteroides pleibeius in severe AA, contrasted with Blautia faecis and Pyramydobacter piscolens predominantly in controls. Significantly, microbial imbalance correlated with AA severity (SALT scores) and systemic inflammatory markers, with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines linked to more severe disease. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that scalp microbiota may play a role in AA-related inflammation, although it is unclear whether the shifts are a cause or consequence of hair loss. Further research is needed to clarify the causal relationship and mechanisms involved.

Celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder triggered by dietary gluten in genetically predisposed individuals that primarily affects the small intestine. Studies have reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa in the gut microbiota of celiac patients compared with non-celiac controls. However, findings across studies have inconsistencies and no microbial signature of celiac disease has been defined so far. RESULTS: Here, we showed, by comparing celiac patients with their non-celiac 1st-degree relatives, that bacterial communities of related individuals have similar species occurrence and abundance compared with non-relatives, regardless the disease status. We also found in celiac patients a loss of bacterial species associated with fiber degradation, and host metabolic and immune modulation, as ruminiclostridia, ruminococci, Prevotella, and Akkermansia muciniphila species. We demonstrated that the differential abundance of bacterial species correlates to different dietary patterns observed between the two groups. For instance, Ruminiclostridium siraeum, Ruminococcus bicirculans, and Bacteroides plebeious, recognized as fiber-degraders, appear more abundant in non-celiac 1st-degree relatives, which have a vegetable consumption pattern higher than celiac patients. Pattern of servings per day also suggests a possible link between these species' abundance and daily calorie intake. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we evidenced that a kinship approach could be valuable in unveiling potential celiac disease microbial traits, as well as the significance of dietary factors in shaping microbial profiles and their influence on disease development and progression. Our results pave the way for designing and adopting novel dietary strategies based on gluten-free fiber-enriched ingredients to improve disease management and patients' quality of life.

Periodontitis has been identified as clear sequelae of T2DM. This chronic oral disease also impacts the management of the clinical features of diabetes. The oral microbiome characteristics in T2DM with and without periodontitis, as well as the response of this oral microbiome to nonsurgical therapy have not been well described. Knowledge of key oral biological features could help address the observed poorer clinical presentation of T2DM patients. METHODS: The oral microbiome in saliva of adult cohorts periodontally healthy/non-diabetic (non-periodontitis; NP; n = 31), T2DM without periodontitis (DWoP; n = 32), and T2DM with periodontitis (DWP; n = 29) were characterized by microbial molecular analysis using V3-V4 sequencing and Luminex or ELISA techniques for salivary host analytes. RESULTS: Phyla distribution showed DWP with significantly lower levels of Firmicutes and Actinobacteria and higher levels of Fusobacteria and Spirochetes compared to the healthier groups. Approximately 10% of the detected microbial species showed significant differences in frequency and level of colonization among the DWP, DWoP, and NP samples. A subset of bacteria were significantly correlated with clinical disease features, as well as a specific repertoire of salivary analytes, in particular matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)8/MMP9, interleukin-1ß, B-cell activating factor, and resistin differed between the groups and were related to specific taxa. Principal component analysis that identified a majority of the DWP subjects microbiome was unique based upon an array of 27 taxa out of up to 255 detected in the saliva samples. CONCLUSION: T2DM patients with periodontitis show unique oral microbiome and salivary analyte composition compared to diabetics or non-diabetic persons without periodontitis. Specific members of the oral microbiome relate directly to the clinical disease features and/or salivary biomolecules in T2DM individuals.

The human gut microbiome produces and consumes a variety of compounds that interact with the host and impact health. Succinate is of particular interest as it intersects with both host and microbiome metabolism. However, which gut bacteria are most responsible for the consumption of intestinal succinate is poorly understood. RESULTS: We build upon an enrichment-based whole fecal sample culturing approach and identify two main bacterial taxa that are responsible for succinate consumption in the human intestinal microbiome, Phascolarctobacterium and Dialister. These two taxa have the hallmark of a functional guild and are strongly mutual exclusive across 21,459 fecal samples in 94 cohorts and can thus be used to assign a robust "succinotype" to an individual. We show that they differ with respect to their rate of succinate consumption in vitro and that this is associated with higher concentrations of fecal succinate. Finally, individuals suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more likely to have the Dialister succinotype compared to healthy subjects. CONCLUSIONS: We identified that only two bacterial genera are the key succinate consumers in human gut microbiome, despite the fact that many more intestinal bacteria encode for the succinate pathway. This highlights the importance of phenotypic assays in functionally profiling intestinal microbiota. A stratification based on "succinotype" is to our knowledge the first function-based classification of human intestinal microbiota. The association of succinotype with IBD thus builds a bridge between microbiome function and IBD pathophysiology related to succinate homeostasis. Video Abstract.

Lactiplantibacillus plantarum is a species found in a wide range of ecological niches, including vegetables and dairy products, and it may occur naturally in the human gastrointestinal tract. The precise mechanisms underlying the beneficial properties of these microbes to their host remain obscure. Although Lactic acid bacteria are generally regarded as safe, there are rare cases of the emergence of infections and antibiotic resistance by certain probiotics. OBJECTIVE: An in silico whole genome sequence analysis of putative probiotic bacteria was set up to identify strains, predict desirable functional properties, and identify potentially detrimental antibiotic resistance and virulence genes. METHODS: We characterized the genomes of three L. plantarum strains (54B, 54C, and 55A) isolated from Ethiopian traditional cottage cheese. Whole-genome sequencing was performed using Illumina MiSeq sequencing. The completeness and quality of the genome of L. plantarum strains were assessed through CheckM. RESULTS: Analyses results showed that L. plantarum 54B and 54C are closely related but different strains. The genomes studied did not harbor resistance and virulence factors. They had five classes of carbohydrate-active enzymes with several important functions. Cyclic lactone autoinducer, terpenes, Type III polyketide synthases, ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides-like gene clusters, sactipeptides, and all genes required for riboflavin biosynthesis were identified, evidencing their promising probiotic properties. Six bacteriocin-like structures encoding genes were found in the genome of L. plantarum 55A. CONCLUSIONS: The lack of resistome and virulome and their previous functional capabilities suggest the potential applicability of these strains in food industries as bio-preservatives and in the prevention and/or treatment of infectious diseases. The results also provide insights into the probiotic potential and safety of these three strains and indicate avenues for further mechanistic studies using these isolates.

A two-sample bidirectional Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis was performed to evaluate the potential causal relationship between the composition of gut microbiota and infertility, along with associated diseases. RESULTS: Sixteen strong causal associations between gut microbes and reproductive system diseases were identified. Sixty-one causal associations between gut microbes and reproductive system diseases were determined. The genus Eubacterium hallii was a protective factor against premature ovarian failure and a pathogenic factor of endometriosis. The genus Erysipelatoclostridium was the pathogenic factor of many diseases, such as PCOS, endometriosis, epididymitis, and orchitis. The genus Intestinibacter is a pathogenic factor of male infertility and sexual dysfunction. The family Clostridiaceae 1 was a protective factor against uterine polyps and a pathogenic factor of orchitis and epididymitis. The results of reverse causal association analysis revealed that endometriosis, orchitis, and epididymitis all led to a decrease in the abundance of bifidobacteria and that female infertility-related diseases had a greater impact on gut microbes than male infertility-related diseases did. CONCLUSIONS: The findings from the MR analysis indicate that there is a bidirectional causal relationship between the gut microbiota and infertility as well as associated ailments. Compared with ovarian diseases, uterine diseases are more likely to lead to changes in women's gut microbiota. The findings of this research offer valuable perspectives on the mechanism and clinical investigation of reproductive system diseases caused by microorganisms.

Biweekly samples were analyzed from February 2022 through May 2023. Samples were collected from the wastewater treatment facility at USAFA before treatment and stored at -20 °C until total nucleic acid (tNA: DNA and RNA) extraction. tNA was then subject to the probe-based capture system, VirCapSeq, and run through a collection of public bioinformatics pipelines to identify captured viral pathogens and perform phylogenetic analysis. It was determined by the USAFA IRB that the study was non-human subject research and was deemed exempt. RESULTS: In total, 68 families of viruses were identified, comprising thousands of individual strains. This study focused on viruses responsible for gastrointestinal dysfunction as a test of the use of the VirCapSeq-VERT to identify human pathogenic viruses within a complex and highly enriched biological sample. Four enteric viruses dominated the wastewater samples, with Adenoviridae most prevalent before the cadet winter recess (December 17, 2022-January 4, 2023) and Astroviridae most abundant thereafter. CONCLUSION: Although gastroenteritis outbreaks at USAFA are commonly attributed to norovirus because of clinical presentation and the acute nature of the illness-often diagnosed and treated without confirmatory stool testing-this virus was not found in high prevalence in these wastewater samples. Among adenoviruses, F serotype 41 predominated, suggesting a role in gastrointestinal infections among the cadet population. Phylogenetic investigation of adenovirus and norovirus exposed common variants with seasonal distributions. These findings may prompt correlational studies to assess the clinical predictive capability of VirCapSeq-VERT and to determine the utility of wastewater monitoring as an outbreak early warning system.

The symbiotic gut microbiota is pivotal for human health, with its composition linked to various diseases and metabolic disorders. Despite its significance, there remains a gap in systematically evaluating how host phenotypes, such as gender, age, and body mass index (BMI), influence gut microbiota. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We conducted an analysis of the gut microbiota of 185 Chinese adults based on whole-metagenome shotgun sequencing of fecal samples. Our investigation focused on assessing the effects of gender, age, and BMI on gut microbiota across three levels: diversity, gene/phylogenetic composition, and functional composition. Our findings suggest that these phenotypes have a minor impact on shaping the gut microbiome compared to enterotypes, they do not correlate significantly within- or between-sample diversity. We identified a substantial number of phenotype-associated genes and metagenomic linkage groups (MLGs), indicating variations in gut microflora composition. Specifically, we observed a decline in beneficial Firmicutes microbes, such as Eubacterium, Roseburia, Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcus spp., in both older individuals and those with higher BMI, while potentially harmful microbes like Erysipelotrichaceae, Subdoligranulum and Streptococcus spp. increased with age. Additionally, Blautia and Dorea spp. were found to increase with BMI, aligning with prior research. Surprisingly, individuals who were older or overweight exhibited a lack of Bacteroidetes, a dominant phylum in the human gut microbiota that includes opportunistic pathogens, while certain species of the well-known probiotics Bifidobacterium were enriched in these groups, suggesting a complex interplay of these bacteria warranting further investigation. Regarding gender, several gender-associated MLGs from Bacteroides, Parabacteroides, Clostridium and Akkermansia were enriched in females. Functional analysis revealed a multitude of phenotype-associated KEGG orthologs (KOs). CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study underscores the influence of gender, age, and BMI on gut metagenomes, affecting both phylogenetic and functional composition. However, further investigation is needed to elucidate the precise roles of these bacteria, including both pathogens and probiotics.

Bats (Order Chiroptera) are an important reservoir of emerging zoonotic microbes, including viruses of public health concern such as henipaviruses, lyssaviruses, and SARS-related coronaviruses. Despite the continued discovery of new viruses in bat populations, a significant proportion of these viral agents remain uncharacterized, highlighting the imperative for additional research aimed at elucidating their evolutionary relationship and taxonomic classification. RESULTS: In order to delve deeper into the viral reservoir hosted by bats, the present study employed Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology to analyze 13,105 swab samples obtained from various locations in China. Analysis of 378 sample pools revealed the presence of 846 vertebrate-associated viruses. Subsequent thorough examination, adhering to the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) criteria for virus classification, identified a total of 120 putative viral species with the potential to emerge as novel viruses, comprising a total of 294 viral strains. Phylogenetic analysis of conserved genomic regions indicated the novel virus exhibited a diverse array of viral lineages and branches, some of which displayed close genetic relationships to known human and livestock pathogens, such as poxviruses and pestiviruses. CONCLUSIONS: This study investigates the breadth of DNA and RNA viruses harbored by bats, delineating several novel evolutionary lineages and offering significant contributions to virus taxonomy. Furthermore, the identification of hitherto unknown viruses with relevance to human and livestock health underscores the importance of this study in encouraging infectious disease monitoring and management efforts in both public health and veterinary contexts. Video Abstract.

Respiratory virus infections were diagnosed by qPCR with the Fast Track Diagnostics Respiratory Pathogens 21 on nasopharyngeal swabs collected between 01/03/2021-31/10/2022 and sent for routine diagnosis purpose to our clinical microbiology-virology laboratory at public university hospitals of Marseille, Southern France. RESULTS: Nasopharyngeal swabs from 17,689 patients were tested, of which 8,133 (46 %) were positive for ≥1 respiratory virus and 1,255 (15%) were co-infected with ≥2 viruses including 213 (2.6 %) with 3-7 viruses. Among them, 1,005 (80 %) were younger than 5 years, and mean age was significantly lower for coinfected than monoinfected patients (6.6 versus 23.8 years; p < 0.0001). Viruses with the highest confection rates were HBoV (97 %), HPeV (97 %), EV (92 %), ADV (68 %), and HCoV-HKU1 (63 %). Iterative infections were observed in 96 patients and they involved 10 different viruses. CONCLUSIONS: Our study points out that coinfections with respiratory viruses vary over time in prevalence, involve majoritarily young children, and may involve concurrent acute infections or acute-on-chronic infections, which deserves further specific studies.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most common gastrointestinal malignancy worldwide, with obesity-induced lipid metabolism disorders playing a crucial role in its progression. A complex connection exists between gut microbiota and the development of intestinal tumors through the microbiota metabolite pathway. Metabolic disorders frequently alter the gut microbiome, impairing immune and cellular functions and hastening cancer progression. METHODS: This study thoroughly examined the gut microbiota through 16S rRNA sequencing of fecal samples from 181 CRC patients, integrating preoperative Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels and RNA sequencing data. The study includes a comparison of microbial diversity, differential microbiological analysis, exploration of the associations between microbiota, tumor microenvironment immune cells, and immune genes, enrichment analysis of potential biological functions of microbe-related host genes, and the prediction of LDL-C status through microorganisms. RESULTS: The analysis revealed that differences in α and β diversity indices of intestinal microbiota in CRC patients were not statistically significant across different LDL-C metabolic states. Patients exhibited varying LDL-C metabolic conditions, leading to a bifurcation of their gut microbiota into two distinct clusters. Patients with LDL-C metabolic irregularities had higher concentrations of twelve gut microbiota, which were linked to various immune cells and immune-related genes, influencing tumor immunity. Under normal LDL-C metabolic conditions, the protective microorganism Anaerostipes_caccae was significantly negatively correlated with the GO Biological Process pathway involved in the negative regulation of the unfolded protein response in the endoplasmic reticulum. Both XGBoost and MLP models, developed using differential gut microbiota, could forecast LDL-C levels in CRC patients biologically. CONCLUSIONS: The intestinal microbiota in CRC patients influences the LDL-C metabolic status. With elevated LDL-C levels, gut microbiota can regulate the function of immune cells and gene expression within the tumor microenvironment, affecting cancer-related pathways and promoting CRC progression. LDL-C and its associated gut microbiota could provide non-invasive markers for clinical evaluation and treatment of CRC patients.

Schistosomiasis japonica is a serious threat to human health. It causes damage to the intestine and liver. Probiotic therapy has been shown to be effective in alleviating intestinal diseases and improving host health. Previous studies have found that Bacillus amyloliquefaciens could alleviate the pathological symptoms of schistosomiasis japonica, but the regulatory mechanism of alleviating schistosomiasis japonica is still unknown. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: This study analyzed the dynamic changes of intestinal microbiome in mice infected with Schistosoma japonicum after the intervention of B. amyloliquefaciens and its connection to host metabolism by multi-omics sequencing technology. B. amyloliquefaciens was found to significantly regulate the homeostasis of intestinal microbiota by promoting the growth of beneficial bacteria and inhibiting potential pathogenic bacteria and protect the number of core microbes. Meanwhile, the genes related to the metabolism of glycerophospholipids and amino acid from intestinal microbiome changed significantly, and were shown to be significantly positively correlated with the associated metabolites of microbial origin. Moreover, host metabolism (lipid metabolism and steroid hormone biosynthesis) was also found to be significantly regulated. CONCLUSIONS: The recovery of intestinal microbial homeostasis and the regulation of host metabolism revealed the potential probiotic properties of B. amyloliquefaciens, which also provided new ideas for the prevention and adjuvant treatment of schistosomiasis japonica.

Colobines are primarily leaf-eating primates, depend on microbiota of gastrointestinal tracts for food digestion. However, the gut microbiota of Malaysia's colobines specifically langurs remains unstudied. AIMS: Hence, we aim to analyze the fecal microbiomes of Malaysia's langurs using Presbytis femoralis, Presbytis robinsoni, Trachypithecus obscurus, and Trachypithecus cristatus from various landscapes as models. MATERIAL AND METHODS: We collected samples from all four species across several areas in Peninsular Malaysia and performed 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicon sequencing using the Illumina sequencing platform. RESULTS: Presbytis femoralis exhibited the highest bacterial diversity, followed by T. obscurus, T. cristatus, P. robinsoni and the lowest, P. siamensis. Over 11 million operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were identified across Malaysia's langurs spanning 26 phyla, 180 families, and 329 genera of microbes. The OTUs were dominated by Firmicutes, Proteobacteria, and Bacteroidetes. There are 11 genera of pathogenic bacteria were identified across all host species. Nine pathogenic bacterial genera inhabit both T. obscurus, indicating poor health due to low bacterial diversity and heightened pathogenicity. In contrast, P. robinsoni with the fewest pathogenic species is deemed the healthiest among Malaysia's langurs. DISCUSSION: This study demonstrates that alterations in diet, behavior, and habitat affect bacterial diversity in Malaysia's langurs' gut microbiota. Even though this is the first comprehensive analysis of langur microbiomes in Malaysia, it is important to note the limitations regarding the number of samples, populations sampled, and the geographical origins and landscapes of these populations. Our results suggest that Malaysia's langurs may harbor pathogenic bacteria, potentially posing a risk of transmission to humans. CONCLUSION: This highlights the critical need for the conservation and management of Malaysia's langurs, particularly considering their interactions with humans. This data can serve as a foundation for authorities to inform the public about the origins and significance of animal health and the management of zoonotic diseases.

Candida species, especially Candida albicans, cause oral candidiasis, also known as oral thrush. It affects the elderly, newborns, patients under antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, and patients with weaker immune systems. Although successful, traditional antifungal medications are available, they may have negative effects and do not prevent recurrence. Conventional antifungal medications have a restricted range of effectiveness; hence, the need for a novel antifungal agent arises. Chitosan, a natural polymer made from chitin found in crustaceans, kills fungal cells by damaging membranes. Excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability make it a promising medical material. Probiotics, live bacteria, compete with pathogenic microbes for adhesion sites and nutrients, produce antimicrobials such as lactic acid, hydrogen peroxide, and bacteriocins, and modulate the host's immunological response. Adding probiotics to chitosan nanoparticles (CSNPs) boosts their antifungal activity against Candida species and increases their stability and transport to the infection site. METHODS: The antifungal activity was evaluated through in vitro experiments utilizing Candida strains that are significant to oral candidiasis. Different concentrations of CSNPs and formulations loaded with probiotics were examined to assess their effectiveness. The antifungal properties were assessed using microbiological assays, specifically agar diffusion and minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC). RESULTS: The study demonstrated a notable fungicidal impact of CSNPs combined with probiotics against oral candidiasis. Furthermore, the MIC values were lower for the probiotic-loaded CSNPs than for chitosan alone or probiotics alone. CONCLUSION: The combination of CSNPs and probiotics shows potential in effectively combating oral candidiasis by inhibiting fungal growth. This novel method offers a promising strategy for creating therapeutic treatments for oral candidiasis by utilizing the combined benefits of chitosan and probiotics to combat fungal infections effectively.

maternal health during pregnancy can affect the intestinal microbial community of offspring, but currently the impact of intrauterine environmental changes resulting from gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) on the microbiota of offspring as well as its interaction with the immune system remains unclear. AIMS: to explore the impact of intrauterine microbial exposure during pregnancy of gestational diabetes mellitus on the development of neonate's intestinal microbiota and activation of immune responses. METHODS: Levels of lipopolysaccharides in cord blood from GDM and expression of microbial recognition-related proteins in the placenta were measured. To evaluate embryonic intestinal colonization, pregnant mice with GDM were administered with labeled Escherichia coli or Lactobacillus. The intestinal colonization of pups was analyzed through 16S rRNA gene sequencing and labeled microbial culture. Additionally, memory T lymphocyte and dendritic cell co-culture experiments were conducted to elucidate the immune memory of intestinal microbes during the embryonic stages. RESULT: Gestational diabetes mellitus led to elevated umbilical cord blood LPS level and increased GFP labeled Escherichia coli in the offspring's intestine after gestational microbial exposure. The mouse model of GDM exhibited increased immune markers including TLR4, TLR5, IL-22 and IL-23 in the placenta and a recall response from memory T cells in offspring's intestines, with similar observations found in human experiments. Furthermore, reduced intestinal microbiome diversity and an increased ratio of Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes was found in GDM progeny, with the stability of bacterial colonization been interfered. CONCLUSIONS: Our investigation has revealed a noteworthy correlation between gestational diabetes and intrauterine microbial exposure, as well as alterations in the neonatal microbiota and activation of immune responses. These findings highlight the gestational diabetes's role on offspring's gut microbiota and immune system interactions with early-life pathogen exposure.

The world society is still suffering greatly from waterborne infections, with developing countries bearing most of the morbidity and death burden, especially concerning young children. Moreover, microbial resistance is one of the most prevalent global problems that extends the need for self-medication and the healing period, or it may be linked to treatment failure that results in further hospitalization, higher healthcare expenses, and higher mortality rates. Thus, innovative synthesis of new antimicrobial materials is required to preserve the environment and enhance human health. RESULTS: The present study highlighted a simple and cost-effective approach to biosynthesize a chitosan/graphene oxide/zinc oxide nanocomposite (CS/GO/ZnO) alone and immobilized in a macroporous cryogel as a new antimicrobial agent. Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633 was used as a safe and efficient bio-nano-factory during biosynthesis. The formation of CS/GO/ZnO was confirmed and characterized using different analyses including ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy (UV-Vis), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), selective area diffraction pattern (SADP), Zeta analyses, scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). GO combined with ZnO NPs successfully and displayed an adsorption peak at 358 nm. The XRD results showed the crystalline composition of the loaded ZnO NPs on GO sheets. FTIR spectrum confirmed the presence of proteins during the synthesis which act as stabilizing and capping agents. The nanocomposite has a high negative surface charge (-32.8 ± 5.7 mV) which increases its stability. SEM and TEM showing the size of biosynthesized ZnO-NPs was in the range of 40-50 nm. The CS/GO/ZnO alone or immobilized in cryogel revealed good antimicrobial activities against B. cereus ATCC 14,579, Escherichia coli ATCC 25,922, and Candida albicans ATCC 10,231 in a dose-dependent manner. The CS/GO/ZnO cryogel revealed higher antimicrobial activity than GO/ZnO nanocomposite and standard antibiotics (amoxicillin and miconazole) with inhibition zones averages of 24.33 ± 0.12, 15.67 ± 0.03, and 17.5 ± 0.49 mm, respectively. The MIC values of the prepared nanocomposite against B. cereus, E. coli, and C. albicans were 80, 80, and 90 µg/ml compared to standard drugs (90, 120 and 150 µg/ml, respectively). According to the TEM ultrastructure studies of nanocomposite-treated microbes, treated cells had severe deformities and morphological alterations compared to the untreated cells including cell wall distortion, the separation between the cell wall and plasma membrane, vacuoles formation moreover complete cell lyses were also noted. In the cytotoxicity test of CS/GO/ZnO alone and its cryogel, there was a significant reduction (p˂0.05) in cell viability of WI-38 normal lung cell line after the concentration of 209 and 164 µg/ml, respectively. It showed the low toxic effect of the nanocomposite and its cryogel on the WI-38 line which implies its safety. In addition, water treatment with the CS/GO/ZnO cryogel decreased turbidity (0.58 NTU), total coliform (2 CFU/100 ml), fecal coliform (1 CFU/100 ml), fecal Streptococcus (2 CFU/100 ml), and heterotrophic plate counts (53 CFU/1 ml) not only in comparison with the chlorine-treated samples (1.69 NTU, 4 CFU/100 ml, 6 CFU/100 ml, 57 CFU/100 ml, and 140 CFU/1 ml, respectively) but also with the raw water samples (6.9 NTU, 10800 CFU/100 ml, 660 CFU/100 ml, 800 CFU/100 ml, and 4400 CFU/1 ml, respectively). Moreover, cryogel significantly decreased the concentration of different heavy metals, especially cobalt compared to chlorine (0.004 ppm, 0.002 ppm, and 0.001 ppm for raw water, chlorine-treated, and cryogel-treated groups, respectively) which helped in the reduction of their toxic effects. CONCLUSION: This study provides an effective, promising, safe, and alternative nanocomposite to treat different human and animal pathogenic microbes that might be used in different environmental, industrial, and medical applications.

Influenza A viruses (IAVs) are significant pathogens of humans and other animals. Although endemic in humans and birds, novel IAV strains can emerge, jump species, and cause epidemics, like the latest variant of H5N1. Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) has been shown capable of detecting human IAVs. We aimed to assess whether whole-genome sequencing (WGS) of IAVs from wastewater is possible and can be used to discriminate between circulating strains of human and any non-human IAVs, such as those of avian origin. METHODS: Using a pan-IAV RT-quantitative PCR assay, six wastewater treatment works (WWTWs) across Northern Ireland were screened from Aug 1 to Dec 5, 2022. A nanopore WGS approach was used to sequence RT-qPCR-positive samples. Phylogenetic analysis of sequences relative to currently circulating human and non-human IAVs was performed. For comparative purposes, clinical data (PCR test results) were supplied by The Regional Virus Laboratory, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust (Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK). FINDINGS: We detected a dynamic IAV signal in wastewater from Sept 5, 2022, onwards across Northern Ireland, which did not show a clear positive relationship with the clinical data obtained for the region. Meta (mixed strain) whole-genome sequences were generated from wastewater samples displaying homology to only human and avian IAV strains. The relative proportion of IAV reads of human versus avian origin differed across time and sample site. A diversity in subtypes and lineages was detected (eg, H1N1, H3N2, and several avian). Avian segment 8 related to those found in recent H5N1 clade 2.3.4.4b was identified. INTERPRETATION: WBE affords a means to monitor circulating human and avian IAV strains and provide crucial genetic information. As such, WBE can provide rapid, cost-effective, year-round One Health surveillance to help control IAV epidemic and pandemic-related threats. However, optimisation of WBE protocols are necessary to ensure observed wastewater signals not only correlate with clinical case data, but yield information on the wider environmental pan-influenz-ome. FUNDING: Department of Health for Northern Ireland.

Antibiotic resistance (ABR) poses a major burden to global health and economic systems. ABR in community-acquired urinary tract infections (CA-UTIs) has become increasingly prevalent. Accurate estimates of ABR's clinical and economic burden are needed to support medical resource prioritization and cost-effectiveness evaluations of urinary tract infection (UTI) interventions. OBJECTIVE: This study aims to systematically synthesize the evidence on the economic costs associated with ABR in CA-UTIs, using published studies comparing the costs of antibiotic-susceptible and antibiotic-resistant cases. METHODS: We searched the PubMed, Ovid MEDLINE and Embase, Cochrane Review Library, and Scopus databases. Studies published in English from January 1, 2008, to January 31, 2023, reporting the economic costs of ABR in CA-UTI of any microbe were included. Independent screening of titles/abstracts and full texts was performed based on prespecified criteria. A quality assessment was performed using the Integrated Quality Criteria for Review of Multiple Study Designs (ICROMS) tool. Data in UTI diagnosis criteria, patient characteristics, perspectives, resource costs, and patient and health economic outcomes, including mortality, hospital length of stay (LOS), and costs, were extracted and analyzed. Monetary costs were converted into 2023 US dollars. RESULTS: This review included 15 studies with a total of 57,251 CA-UTI cases. All studies were from high- or upper-middle-income countries. A total of 14 (93%) studies took a health system perspective, 13 (87%) focused on hospitalized patients, and 14 (93%) reported UTI pathogens. Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are the most prevalent organisms. A total of 12 (80%) studies reported mortality, of which, 7 reported increased mortality in the ABR group. Random effects meta-analyses estimated an odds ratio of 1.50 (95% CI 1.29-1.74) in the ABR CA-UTI cases. All 13 hospital-based studies reported LOS, of which, 11 reported significantly higher LOS in the ABR group. The meta-analysis of the reported median LOS estimated a pooled excess LOS ranging from 1.50 days (95% CI 0.71-4.00) to 2.00 days (95% CI 0.85-3.15). The meta-analysis of the reported mean LOS estimated a pooled excess LOS of 2.45 days (95% CI 0.51-4.39). A total of 8 (53%) studies reported costs in monetary terms-none discounted the costs. All 8 studies reported higher medical costs spent treating patients with ABR CA-UTI in hospitals. The highest excess cost was observed in UTIs caused by carbapenem-resistant Enterobacterales. No meta-analysis was performed for monetary costs due to heterogeneity. CONCLUSIONS: ABR was attributed to increased mortality, hospital LOS, and economic costs among patients with CA-UTI. The findings of this review highlighted the scarcity of research in this area, particularly in patient morbidity and chronic sequelae and costs incurred in community health care. Future research calls for a cost-of-illness analysis of infections, standardizing therapy-pathogen combination comparators, medical resources, productivity loss, intangible costs to be captured, and data from community sectors and low-resource settings and countries.

The extreme environment of the International Space Station (ISS) puts selective pressure on microorganisms unintentionally introduced during its 20+ years of service as a low-orbit science platform and human habitat. Such pressure leads to the development of new features not found in the Earth-bound relatives, which enable them to adapt to unfavorable conditions. RESULTS: In this study, we generated the functional annotation of the genomes of five newly identified species of Gram-positive bacteria, four of which are non-spore-forming and one spore-forming, all isolated from the ISS. Using a deep-learning based tool-deepFRI-we were able to functionally annotate close to 100% of protein-coding genes in all studied species, overcoming other annotation tools. Our comparative genomic analysis highlights common characteristics across all five species and specific genetic traits that appear unique to these ISS microorganisms. Proteome analysis mirrored these genomic patterns, revealing similar traits. The collective annotations suggest adaptations to life in space, including the management of hypoosmotic stress related to microgravity via mechanosensitive channel proteins, increased DNA repair activity to counteract heightened radiation exposure, and the presence of mobile genetic elements enhancing metabolism. In addition, our findings suggest the evolution of certain genetic traits indicative of potential pathogenic capabilities, such as small molecule and peptide synthesis and ATP-dependent transporters. These traits, exclusive to the ISS microorganisms, further substantiate previous reports explaining why microbes exposed to space conditions demonstrate enhanced antibiotic resistance and pathogenicity. CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the microorganisms isolated from ISS we studied have adapted to life in space. Evidence such as mechanosensitive channel proteins, increased DNA repair activity, as well as metallopeptidases and novel S-layer oxidoreductases suggest a convergent adaptation among these diverse microorganisms, potentially complementing one another within the context of the microbiome. The common genes that facilitate adaptation to the ISS environment may enable bioproduction of essential biomolecules need during future space missions, or serve as potential drug targets, if these microorganisms pose health risks. Video Abstract.

Inflammation is a feature of coronary heart disease (CHD), but the role of proinflammatory microbial infection in CHD remains understudied. METHODS AND RESULTS: CHD was defined in the MESA (Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis) as myocardial infarction (251 participants), resuscitated arrest (2 participants), and CHD death (80 participants). We analyzed sequencing reads from 4421 MESA participants in the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine program using the PathSeq workflow of the Genome Analysis Tool Kit and a 65-gigabase microbial reference. Paired reads aligning to 840 microbes were detected in >1% of participants. The association of the presence of microbe reads with incident CHD (follow-up, ~18 years) was examined. First, important variables were ascertained using a single regularized Cox proportional hazard model, examining change of risk as a function of presence of microbe with age, sex, education level, Life's Simple 7, and inflammation. For variables of importance, the hazard ratio (HR) was estimated in separate (unregularized) Cox proportional hazard models including the same covariates (significance threshold Bonferroni corrected P<6×10-5, 0.05/840). Reads from 2 microbes were significantly associated with CHD: Gemella morbillorum (HR, 3.14 [95% CI, 1.92-5.12]; P=4.86×10-6) and Pseudomonas species NFACC19-2 (HR, 3.22 [95% CI, 2.03-5.41]; P=1.58×10-6). CONCLUSIONS: Metagenomics of whole-genome sequence reads opens a possible frontier for detection of pathogens for chronic diseases. The association of G morbillorum and Pseudomonas species reads with CHD raises the possibilities that microbes may drive atherosclerotic inflammation and that treatments for specific pathogens may provide clinical utility for CHD reduction.

We evaluated the inhibitory effect of Neisseria spp. on P. gingivalis invasion using a flow cytometry-based invasion assay and analysed bacterial interactions by visualisation using scanning electron microscopy. Furthermore, we constructed a new experimental pre-mixed culture system that reproduced the interaction environment to evaluate the relevance of this interaction in invasion inhibition. RESULTS: Flow cytometry-based invasion assays showed that all Neisseria spp. inhibited P. gingivalis invasion, with Neisseria mucosa and Neisseria elongata being particularly effective. Interaction analysis using scanning electron microscopy showed that N. mucosa and N. elongata, which have strong inhibitory effects on P. gingivalis invasion, interacted with P. gingivalis at high frequencies. CONCLUSION: Commensal Neisseria was found to exert a beneficial function by directly interacting with P. gingivalis and inhibiting its invasion of gingival epithelial cells. These results suggest that Neisseria, as a probiotic or synbiotic oral commensal, may represent an innovative approach to preventing periodontal disease.

Heat stress significantly impacts dairy cows, primarily through oxidative stress, which undermines their health. The problem is exacerbated by the ongoing global warming trend. Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are safe, economical, and readily accessible options for enhancing the host's antioxidant defenses and preventing oxidative damage. They have been proven effective in alleviating heat stress-related damage, making them an excellent choice for protecting dairy cows from the adverse effects of heat stress. METHOD: In this study, five strains of LAB from Holstein cow milk (Lactobacillus plantarum L5, L14, L17, L19, L20) were evaluated for their heat resistance and antioxidant capacity by evaluating the growth characteristics and tolerance of the strains under high-temperature conditions, as well as their H2O2 tolerance, free radical scavenging ability (DPPH, OH-, ABTS), reducing ability, and EPS production ability. Furthermore, we employed Caco-2 cells to assess the adhesion rate of the strain, thereby confirming its ability to successfully colonize the host's intestinal tract and ensuring the effective execution of its probiotic functions. The strain with excellent heat resistance and antioxidant capacity was then subjected to genomic analysis to gain insight into the molecular mechanisms behind their heat resistance, antioxidant capacity, and safety. RESULTS: Among the two strains, Lactobacillus plantarum L19 emerges as a highly promising candidate. The strain exhibits robust growth even at high temperatures at 40°C and maintains a survival rate of 16.42% at the extreme temperature of 65°C. Furthermore, it demonstrates superior tolerance to hydrogen peroxide (27.3%), and possesses a notably higher free radical scavenging capacity with a high adhesion rate to Caco-2 cell (22.19%) compared to the other four strains tested. Genomic analysis revealed its' genome has 17 genes related to antioxidants and three genes related to heat resistance. Importantly, L19 lacks any resistance genes, ensuring its safety as a probiotic. CONCLUSION: The results imply that Lactobacillus plantarum L19 has the potential to serve as an effective food additive in mitigating damages associated with heat stress. This research offers a valuable reference for the prevention and management of heat stress in dairy cows, while also expanding the scope of applications for LAB derived from cow milk.

We used rat model to investigated the mechanisms of the offspring's neural damage that Nd2O3 exposure in pregnancy. To verify the neural damage of offspring rats, we examed BBB-related factors, such like glutamate and ROS levels in brain tissue, behavioral tests, hippocampal and cortical damage, as well as changes in gut microbiota, intestinal mucosal barrier, and SCFAs in the intestine. Also, we observed some specific indicators of intestinal immune barrier function and gut nerve-related indicators. RESULTS: Maternal Nd2O3 exposure reduced the content of offspring tight junction proteins, increased BBB permeability, leading to Nd accumulation and brain tissue inflammation, affecting offspring's neural development and weakening their spatial learning ability. Nd2O3 also disrupted BBB integrity by regulating SCFAs and BGA. Probiotic intervention in the offspring rats exposed to 2% Nd2O3 showed significant recovery of inflammation in both brain and colon tissues, and reduced BBB permeability. CONCLUSION: Maternal exposure to Nd2O3 affects the offspring's BGA, targeting brain and colon tissues, increasing BBB permeability, affecting neural development, causing damage to the intestinal mucosa, and impacting children's gut development. Probiotics can alleviate these effects. These findings provide valuable insights into understanding the neurodevelopmental and intestinal developmental toxicity of Nd2O3 and its prevention and treatment. It also calls for a comprehensive assessment of the health risks of susceptible populations to Nd2O3, such as pregnant women. It may providing theoretical basis for preventing and controlling neodymium-induced harm in children by examing the repair mechanism of the damage through probiotic intervention.

In this study, we generated an MAP-specific lytic phage library aimed at characterizing the therapeutic potential of phages under environmental and biological conditions that mimic those encountered in infected cattle such as ruminal fluid, milk, colostrum, and the bovine intestinal epithelium, a key site of MAP colonization and, later, transmission. RESULTS: Our library contains a diverse collection of phages that have demonstrated robust lytic activity against MAP. The host range of these phages was thoroughly assessed, revealing that several isolates produce clear plaques on a range of MAP strains, as well as other pathogenic non-tuberculous mycobacterial (NTM) species and M. tuberculosis strains. This broad host range expands the therapeutic potential of the phage collection, positioning it as a potential cross-species antimicrobial tool. In vitro tests under conditions replicating the rumen, milk, and colostrum environments show that selected phages maintain stability and lytic efficacy, even in the presence of complex biological fluids. Furthermore, a subset of these phages was capable of preventing MAP colonization and invasion in cultured bovine epithelial cells, suggesting their potential for direct prophylactic application in cattle. CONCLUSIONS: Our collection of MAP phages represents a valuable source that can be developed into probiotic-like preparations, offering a cost-effective solution for prophylaxis and control of Johne's disease.

Lactiplantibacillus plantarum is a species found in a wide range of ecological niches, including vegetables and dairy products, and it may occur naturally in the human gastrointestinal tract. The precise mechanisms underlying the beneficial properties of these microbes to their host remain obscure. Although Lactic acid bacteria are generally regarded as safe, there are rare cases of the emergence of infections and antibiotic resistance by certain probiotics. OBJECTIVE: An in silico whole genome sequence analysis of putative probiotic bacteria was set up to identify strains, predict desirable functional properties, and identify potentially detrimental antibiotic resistance and virulence genes. METHODS: We characterized the genomes of three L. plantarum strains (54B, 54C, and 55A) isolated from Ethiopian traditional cottage cheese. Whole-genome sequencing was performed using Illumina MiSeq sequencing. The completeness and quality of the genome of L. plantarum strains were assessed through CheckM. RESULTS: Analyses results showed that L. plantarum 54B and 54C are closely related but different strains. The genomes studied did not harbor resistance and virulence factors. They had five classes of carbohydrate-active enzymes with several important functions. Cyclic lactone autoinducer, terpenes, Type III polyketide synthases, ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides-like gene clusters, sactipeptides, and all genes required for riboflavin biosynthesis were identified, evidencing their promising probiotic properties. Six bacteriocin-like structures encoding genes were found in the genome of L. plantarum 55A. CONCLUSIONS: The lack of resistome and virulome and their previous functional capabilities suggest the potential applicability of these strains in food industries as bio-preservatives and in the prevention and/or treatment of infectious diseases. The results also provide insights into the probiotic potential and safety of these three strains and indicate avenues for further mechanistic studies using these isolates.

Constipation is a common symptom in maintenance hemodialysis patients and greatly affects the quality of survival of hemodialysis patients. Fecal microbiota transplantation and probiotics are feasible treatments for functional constipation, but there is still a gap in the research on the characteristics of gut flora in patients with maintenance hemodialysis combined with constipation. The aim of this study is to clarify the characteristics of the intestinal flora and its changes in maintenance hemodialysis patients with constipation. METHODS: Fecal samples were collected from 45 participants, containing 15 in the maintenance hemodialysis constipation group,15 in the maintenance hemodialysis non-constipation group and 15 in the healthy control group. These samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The feature of the intestinal microbiome of maintenance hemodialysis constipation group and the microbiome differences among the three groups were elucidated by species annotation analysis, α-diversity analysis, β-diversity analysis, species difference analysis, and predictive functional analysis. RESULTS: The alpha diversity analysis indicated that maintenance hemodialysis constipation group was less diverse and homogeneous than maintenance hemodialysis non-constipation group and healthy control group. At the genus level, the top ten dominant genera in maintenance hemodialysis constipation group patients were Enterococcus, Escherichia-Shigella, Bacteroides, Streptococcus, Bifidobacterium, Ruminococcus_gnavus_group, Lachnospiraceae_unclassified, Faecalibacterium, Akkermansia and UCG-002. Compared with non-constipation group, the Enterococcus, Rhizobiales_unclassified, Filomicrobium, Eggerthella, Allobaculum, Prevotella_7, Gordonibacter, Mitochondria_unclassified, Lachnoanaerobaculum were significantly higher in constipation group (p<0.05). Compared with non-constipation group, the Kineothrix, Rhodopirellula, Weissella were significantly lower in constipation group (p<0.05). The predictive functional analysis revealed that compared with non-constipation group, constipation group was significantly enriched in pathways associated with pyruate metabolism, flavonoid biosynthesis. CONCLUSIONS: This study describes for the first time the intestinal microbiome characteristics of maintenance hemodialysis patients with constipation. The results of this study suggest that there is a difference in the intestinal flora between maintenance hemodialysis patients with constipation and maintenance hemodialysis patients without constipation.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) presents a significant challenge in healthcare, prompting exploration into non-pharmacological interventions to complement traditional treatments. OBJECTIVE: This systematic review explores the efficacy of lifestyle-based interventions in managing AD. METHODS: A comprehensive literature search was conducted in PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus between 2018 and 2023, selecting randomized controlled trials examining factors such as exercise, diet, stress, and cognitive training in AD patients. RESULTS: The review revealed physical exercise as the predominant non-pharmacological intervention, accompanied by dietary modifications, cognitive training, and therapies such as mindfulness and music. While exercise demonstrated improvements in quality of life, its cognitive benefits were limited. Modified diets, such as Atkins and ketogenic, displayed inconsistent effects on cognitive function but influenced other health-related parameters. Additionally, probiotic therapy and novel cognitive training technologies were explored. CONCLUSIONS: Despite some interventions showing promise in enhancing cognitive function and slowing disease progression, uncertainties remain regarding the dose-response relationship, underlying mechanisms, and potential synergistic effects. Moreover, consideration of genetic and sex-based disparities is warranted. This synthesis underscores the need for further research to elucidate the nuances of non-pharmacological interventions in managing AD effectively. PROSPERO REGISTRATION NUMBER: CRD42023432823.

Preclinical studies provided compelling evidence for SCFAs' modulation of T-cell differentiation, which may act through G-protein coupled receptors 41, 43 and 109a and histone deacetylase inhibition. Foxp3 transcription factor was implicated in the upregulation of Tregs. Human probiotic intervention studies aimed at increasing SCFAs and Tregs and preventing atopic disease showed inconclusive results. However, evidence for probiotic intervention in children with cow's milk protein allergy (CMPA) was more promising and warrants further investigation. CONCLUSION: Preclinical evidence suggests that the mechanism of gut dysbiosis and reduced SCFAs may skew T-cell differentiation towards a Th2 response, thus inducing allergy symptoms. Probiotic trials were inconclusive: probiotics were predominantly unsuccessful in the prevention of allergic disease, however, may be able to modulate food allergy symptoms in infants with CMPA.

First, TLR4 and TLR9 expression was analyzed on human primary intestinal epithelial cells (P-IECs) by qPCR and Western blot analysis. Then genetically designed HEK-Dual™ hTLR9 (NF/IL8) reporter cells (HEK-Dual) were treated with different IFs, L. fermentum CECT5716, and different functional components to measure TLR9 activation via luminescence. Finally, the IFs were investigated in P-IECs to analyze TLR downstream signaling by Western blot analysis. RESULTS: IFs containing intact protein and L. fermentum CECT5716 activated TLR9 in HEK-Dual cells, but the functional components lactoferrin, L-5-methyltetrahydrofolate, and hydrolyzed whey proteins failed to activate TLR9. In P-IECs, the IFs induced increased phosphorylation of MAPK8/9 of the TLR signaling pathway and significantly reduced IL6 levels. Consistently, IL6 levels were increased in P-IECs when TLR9-signaling was inhibited. Interestingly, L. fermentum CECT5716 enhanced TLR9-signaling and increased NF-kappa-B inhibitor alpha-phosphorylation. CONCLUSION: We found out that the used control formula, prebiotic formula, prebiotic formula with hydrolyzed-protein, and L. fermentum CECT5716 reduce IL6 levels in human P-IECs through TLR9 activation. L. fermentum CECT5716 and the here tested IFs could be a promising approach for modulation of gut health in infants.

B. subtilis R0179 was administered to 8-week-old male C57BL/6J mice with periodontitis. Oral load of P. gingivalis ATCC 33277 and periodontal tissue loss were quantified. The cell-free supernatant (CFS) was separated to assess its anti-P. gingivalis effect. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses identified potential antibacterial components in the CFS, further evaluated for anti-P. gingivalis effects. RESULTS: B. subtilis R0179 significantly reduced P. gingivalis ATCC 33277 levels and mitigated periodontal tissue loss in mice. The CFS, rather than inactivated B. subtilis R0179 cells, exhibited antibacterial activity. Proteomic and metabolomic analyses identified mesaconate and citraconate as key antibacterial agents. Disk diffusion assays confirmed the efficacy of mesaconate against P. gingivalis, while citraconate had no effect. Mesaconate showed a dose-dependent reduction in P. gingivalis ATCC 33277 population and periodontal tissue loss in mice. CONCLUSION: These findings highlight B. subtilis R0179 and its metabolite mesaconate as promising candidates for therapeutic development against periodontitis by inhibiting P. gingivalis ATCC 33277 effectively.

Sepsis-induced organ failure and high mortality are largely ascribed to the failure of bacterial clearance from the infected tissues. Recently, probiotic bacteria-released extracellular vesicles (BEVs) have been implicated as critical mediators of intercellular communication which are widely involved in the regulation of the inflammatory response. However, their functional role in macrophage phagocytosis during sepsis has never been explored. METHODS: BEVs were collected from three different strains of probiotics including Lactiplantibacillus plantarum WCFS1 (LP WCFS1), Lactobacillus rhamnosus Gorbach-Goldin (LGG), and Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (EcN), or from LGG cultured under three pH conditions (pH5-acid, pH6.5-standard, pH8-akaline) through differential centrifugation, filtration, and ultracentrifugation of their culture supernatants. In vitro phagocytosis was measured in Raw264.7 cells and bone marrow-derived macrophages using pHrodo red E. coli BioParticles. The in vivo therapeutic effects of BEVs were tested using a feces-injection-in-peritoneum (FIP) model of polymicrobial sepsis. RESULTS: LGG-derived EVs (BEVLGG) were the best among these three probiotics BEVs in stimulating macrophages to take up bacteria. Furthermore, BEVLGG collected from pH8 culture condition (BEVpH8) exhibited the strongest capacity of phagocytosis, compared with BEVpH5 and BEVpH6.5. Treatment of septic mice with BEVpH8 significantly prolonged animal survival; increased bacterial clearance from the blood, peritoneal lavage fluid, and multiple organs; and decreased serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines/chemokines, as well as reduced multiple organ injuries, in comparison with control-treated septic mice. Mechanistically, RNA-seq and bioinformatic analysis identified that the FPR1/2 signaling was remarkably activated, along with its downstream pathways (PI3K-Akt-MARCO and NADPH-ROS) in BEVpH8-treated macrophages, compared with control cells. Accordingly, pre-addition of Boc2, a specific antagonist of FPR1/FPR2, to macrophages significantly attenuated BEVpH8-mediated phagocytosis, compared to controls. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that LGG-derived BEVs may have therapeutic effects against sepsis-induced organ injury and mortality through enhancing FPR1/2-mediated macrophage phagocytosis.

This was a single-blinded, single-center, two-arm randomized controlled trial conducted between March 2023 and June 2024. A total of 50 patients (13 males (26%) and 37 females (74%) with a mean age of 21.33±2.04) who required a non-extraction-based treatment using fixed orthodontic appliances were enrolled and randomly divided into two groups: the probiotics group (PG) who underwent orthodontic treatment with probiotic tablets of Lactobacillus reuteri and the control group (CG) who underwent orthodontic treatment without probiotics. The following periodontal parameters were recorded: plaque index (PI), gingival index (GI), papillary bleeding index (PBI), and probing depth (PD). These indices were assessed three times: before the start of orthodontic treatment (T0) and after three months (T1) and after six months (T2) of applying fixed appliances. RESULTS: The mean values for PI, GI, PBI, and PD were statistically significantly lower in the PG compared to the CG at both time points T2 and T3 (p<0.05). In the PG, there was a significant difference in the PI between time points T0 and T1 (p<0.001), but there was no significant difference between T1 and T2 (p=0.074). The GI, PBI, and PD differences were also insignificant (p>0.05). Conversely, all studied periodontal parameters significantly increased during the assessment periods in the CG (p<0.001). CONCLUSION: Using probiotic lozenges that contain Lactobacillus reuteri, alongside regular teeth brushing, during the first six months of fixed orthodontic treatment in adults can help maintain good oral hygiene. This approach reduces plaque buildup and helps prevent the onset of clinical signs associated with periodontal disease.

Probiotics have been used to prevent antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD), but practical guidelines are sparse. This trial evaluated the efficacy and safety of a high-dose, multistrain probiotic mix (Sinquanon), specially designed for prevention of AAD in adults. METHODS: A phase IV, multicenter, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group clinical trial was conducted over 5 months. Participants receiving broad-spectrum antibiotics were administered the specialized probiotic mix or placebo from the first dose of antibiotics until 14 days after the last antibiotic dose. The primary outcome measure was the incidence of AAD. RESULTS: In total, 564 participants were randomized (probiotic mix: 285; placebo: 279), of which 9 participants discontinued the trial early (probiotic mix: 3; placebo: 6), had no efficacy data, and were excluded from the efficacy analysis. The 555 remaining participants completed the trial and were included in the efficacy analysis (probiotic mix: 282; placebo: 273). AAD occurred less frequently in the studied probiotic mix versus placebo group (9.2% vs 25.3%, P < .001), resulting in an absolute risk reduction of 16% and a number needed to treat of 6 (95% confidence interval, 4.55-10.49). A significant improvement in the average gastrointestinal quality of life in the studied probiotic mix versus placebo group was also observed. There were no clinically relevant differences in the incidence of adverse events between the studied probiotic mix and the placebo group. CONCLUSIONS: The specially designed high-dose, multistrain probiotic mix (Sinquanon) demonstrated to be beneficial compared with placebo in the prevention of AAD in adults who received broad-spectrum antibiotics. CLINICALTRIALSGOV IDENTIFIER AND URL: NCT05607056; https://classic.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT05607056.

A narrative review of nonprescription mitigation strategies in AD was conducted. RESULTS: We identified avoidance strategies for the various routes of exposure such as air pollution, water contamination, or inclusion in home goods, skin care products, and cleansers. Evidence for and against dietary modification and emollient use as primary prevention were also elucidated. To remember these interventions we propose a mnemonic, HELPSS AD: Home decor, Emollients, Laundering, Probiotics, Soaks, Social support, Air quality, and Diet. LIMITATIONS: Each of these categories presents nuanced molecular differences that must be considered. For example, probiotic responses vary by the specific species while home products and pollution must be analyzed by the specific toxins. CONCLUSION: Although the interventions discussed lack the level of evidence required for inclusion into formal guidelines, awareness of these approaches may offer aid to, and build trust with, patients and caregivers.

A descriptive review combining different methodological approaches was conducted. To provide the most suitable recommendations for real-world implementation, our analyses considered the impact of these interventions within three distinct health settings: facility, mixed, and community. RESULTS: In facility settings, the strongest evidence supported the implementation of multimodal stewardship interventions for AMR reduction and device-associated infection prevention bundles for HAI prevention. Emollients in preterm newborns reduced the risk of invasive infection compared to routine skin care. Probiotics in preterm newborns reduced neonatal mortality, invasive infection, and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) risks compared to standard care or placebo. There was insufficient evidence for synbiotics and prophylactic systemic antifungals in LMICs. In mixed settings, CBKs reduced neonatal mortality risk compared to standard care. In community settings, chlorhexidine umbilical cord cleansing reduced omphalitis risk compared to dry cord care. For the treatment of PSBIs, purely domiciliary-based antibiotic delivery reduced the risk of all-cause neonatal mortality when compared to the standard hospital referral. CONCLUSION: Strategies for preventing HAIs and reducing AMR in healthcare facilities should be multimodal, and strategy selection should consider the feasibility of integration within existing newborn care programs. Probiotics are effective for facility-based use in preterm newborns; however, the establishment of high-quality, cost-effective mass production of standardized formulations is needed. Chlorhexidine cord cleansing is effective in community settings to prevent omphalitis in contexts where unhygienic cord applications are prevalent. Community-based antibiotic delivery of simplified regimens for PSBIs is a safe alternative when hospital-based care in LMICs is not possible or is declined by parents. More randomized trial evidence is needed to establish the effectiveness of CBKs, emollients, synbiotics, and prophylactic systemic antifungals in LMICs.

Preterm infants discharged from the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) have a risk of severe viral respiratory tract infections (RTIs). Researchers have recently reported the potential use of postbiotics to decrease RTIs in young children. However, the safety and efficacy of postbiotics for preventing RTIs in preterm infants is not yet established. METHODS: We conducted a pilot double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study of the heat-killed lactic acid bacterium Pediococcus acidilactici K15 in 41 preterm infants born at <36 weeks of gestation and discharged from the NICU at Chiba University Hospital. RESULTS: Following once-daily K15 or placebo treatment for one year, no significant differences were found in the mean number of febrile days (4.5 [1.5-7.4] days vs. 6.6 [2.6-10.5] days). The subgroup analysis showed that the effect of treatment on the number of febrile days was more prominent in the K15 group than in the placebo group, among children with older siblings. The 16S rRNA gene sequencing of fecal samples illustrated that the genus Faecalimonas was enriched in the K15 group, potentially promoting butyrate production by butyrate-producing bacteria. No adverse events were found to be associated with K15 intake. CONCLUSION: There were no clear data to show the effectiveness of K15 in preventing fever and RTIs in preterm babies during infancy. A larger clinical trial is warranted.

Pathogenic Escherichia coli strains produce neonatal septicemia after colonizing the neonatal gut. While the probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG (LGG) effectively reduces neonatal sepsis, LGG's effects on the neonatal intestinal microbiota alterations and inflammation triggered by E. coli are incompletely understood. We hypothesized that LGG significantly modulates the specific neonatal gut microbial populations changes and the inflammatory response elicited by the enteral introduction of septicemia-producing E. coli. To test this hypothesis, newborn rats were pretreated orally with LGG or placebo prior to infection with the neonatal E. coli septicemia clinical isolate SCB34. Amplicon 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed on intestinal samples. Intestinal injury and expression of inflammatory mediators and apoptosis were determined. RESULTS: Alpha diversity of gut microbiota was greater in SCB34-infected pups in comparison to sham-infected pups, these changes were not modified by LGG pretreatment. Beta diversity analyses also showed differences between SCB34-infected vs. uninfected pups. LGG pretreatment before SCB34 infection did not result in significant beta diversity changes compared to placebo. Moreover, individual genera and species abundance analyses by linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) showed significant changes in Gram-negative, Gram-positive, and anaerobic populations resulting from LGG pretreatment and SCB34 infection. LGG significantly suppressed the expression of inflammatory cytokines but did not attenuate SCB34-induced apoptosis or histologic injury. CONCLUSIONS: LGG modulates clinically significant microbiota features and inflammation triggered by pathogenic E. coli intestinal infection shortly after birth. This new knowledge can potentially be harnessed to design novel interventions against gut-derived neonatal sepsis.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are one of the most commonly reported infections in Belgian nursing home residents. In older adults, UTI diagnosis and management is complex, often leading to over-diagnosis and irrational antimicrobial use, stressing the need for a guideline approach. OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: A consensus statement on the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of UTIs in older adults residing in nursing homes was developed in a collaborative effort between the Flemish Hospital Outbreak Support Teams, the Flemish Agency for Care and Health, the Association of the Flemish Coordinating and Advising General Practitioners, the Belgian Association of Urology, the Belgian Society for Gerontology and Geriatrics and PhD researchers based on a combination of clinical expertise, (inter)national guidelines and peer-reviewed studies. RESULTS: Optimizing fluid intake, appropriate toilet behaviour and posture, mobilization and local estrogen therapy in women are of proven value in UTI prevention, whereas the use of cranberry and probiotics is not to be advocated. The importance of avoiding bladder catheterization is stressed. In older nursing home residents, the diagnosis of UTIs remains challenging, mostly due to atypical systemic symptoms. A consensus diagnostic algorithm for UTI among residents with and without a urinary catheter was developed, including the presence of suggestive clinical symptoms and a positive urine culture. Urine dipsticks have a high negative but a low positive predictive value. C-reactive protein point-of-care testing is not recommended. Asymptomatic bacteriuria should not be screened for, in order to avoid unnecessary triggers for treatment. In cystitis, nitrofurantoin is the primary choice for treatment, with fosfomycin as an alternative; in prostatitis and uncomplicated pyelonephritis a fluoroquinolone is the advocated empirical antimicrobial.

Antibiotic-associated diarrhea (AAD) is a prevalent complication of antibiotic therapy, attributed to disruptions in gut microbiota. Probiotics are increasingly studied for their potential in preventing AAD by restoring microbial balance. OBJECTIVE: The aim of this investigation was to assess the efficacy of probiotics in reducing AAD in adult patients when compared to a placebo. METHODOLOGY: This research was conducted from March 2023 to March 2024 using a randomized, placebo-controlled design at multiple institutions: Khyber Teaching Hospital, Peshawar; Prime Teaching Hospital, Peshawar; Mufti Mahmood Memorial Teaching Hospital, Dera Ismail Khan; Shalamar Hospital, Lahore; University Hospitals of Leicester; and DHQ Teaching Hospital Kohat, enrolling 340 adult patients prescribed systemic antibiotics. Eligible participants were aged 18 years and older, while those with chronic diarrhea, inflammatory bowel disease, immunodeficiency, recent probiotic or antibiotic use, or inability to provide informed consent were excluded. The sample size was calculated using WHO guidelines, resulting in a target of 340 to ensure adequate power. Participants were randomized to receive either probiotics (Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and Bifidobacterium longum BB536) or placebo, administered within 24 hours of starting antibiotics. Daily monitoring of bowel habits and symptoms was performed using standardized diaries, and adherence was evaluated through pill counts. Statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 27 (Released 2020; IBM Corp., Armonk, New York, United States), comparing the incidence, severity, and duration of AAD between groups, with a significance threshold of p < 0.05. RESULTS: In the probiotic group, 31 patients (18.23%) developed AAD compared to 53 patients (31.17%) in the placebo group (p=0.01). Among those with AAD, the probiotic group experienced a shorter duration (mean 3.5 ± 1.2 days) compared to placebo (mean 5.1 ± 1.8 days, p=0.002). Adherence rates were high in both groups (probiotic: 96.4%, placebo: 95.9%). Significant improvements in bowel habits were reported more frequently in the probiotic group (77.06%) than placebo (50.59%, p=0.02). The hospital stay duration was similar between groups (probiotic: mean 7.8 ± 2.1 days, placebo: mean 8.3 ± 2.4 days, p=0.15). CONCLUSION: Probiotics significantly reduced the incidence and duration of AAD compared to placebo, with high adherence and favorable patient-reported outcomes.

Prevention, management or cure of diseases through dietary approaches is becoming increasingly important. Research suggests that probiotic, oxalate-degrading Lactobacillus species administered via a milk and cereal food can prevent kidney stones while also addressing nutritional deficiencies and maintaining essential calcium levels. This study investigates the effect of a composite probiotic milk beverage on urolithiatic rats. EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Probiotic milk-barley beverage (PMBB) was prepared by fermentation of milk enriched with barley (Hordeum vulgare) flour using starter culture containing oxalate-degrading probiotic strains (Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus strains MTCC5945 and MTCC25062, Lactobacillus helveticus MTCC5463 and Lactiplantibacillus plantarum M11). Cumin and common salt were used as flavourings. Unfermented milk-barley base (C) served as control. Wistar rats were divided in four groups (N=6). Normal control (NC) group received normal rat diet, and to induce kidney stones, ethylene glycol (0.75 %) and ammonium chloride (1 %) were administered to the disease control (DC) group, PMBB and control (C) groups for 28 days. PMBB and C groups received 1 mL of probiotic milk and barley beverage and unfermented milk-barley base from day 15 to day 28. Indicators of urolithiasis were studied. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: PMBB significantly (p<0.05) increased urine output, decreased urine oxalate concentrations and increased creatinine, calcium and uric acid concentrations. Serum parameters such as concentrations of calcium, uric acid, urea and creatinine increased significantly (p<0.05) in DC rats, but decreased significantly (p<0.05) in the PMBB group. In addition, serum concentrations of magnesium and osteopontin decreased more significantly in DC rats than in the PMBB ones. The increase in malondialdehyde and decrease in reduced glutathione concentrations observed in the DC group were significantly lower in the PMBB group. The histomorphology of the kidney tissue of DC rats showed calcium oxalate crystal aggregates in the tubules, indicators of renal injury, tubular dilatation, enlarged urinary space and shrunken glomeruli. The PMBB group showed an improvement in the renal histological architecture. Analysis of the caecal digesta of the rats showed a significantly (p<0.05) higher mass fraction of fatty acids (acetic and propionic) in the treatment group. The results show the potential of PMBB in the dietary control of urolithiasis. NOVELTY AND SCIENTIFIC CONTRIBUTION: This study focuses on the antiurolithiatic prospect of a composite probiotic milk beverage produced with oxalate-degrading culture. It also points to a new functional food form that shows promising health benefits in nutrition of patients with urolithiasis.

Participants were recruited between 4 June 2024 and 15 July 2024, and were aged between 18 and 50years. They did not suffer from mental/physical disabilities, craniofacial disorders, enamel/tooth dysplasia and were not taking medication affecting plaque build-up. Participants were randomized in two groups using a computer programme and sealed envelopes: the group A (control) used an ordinary toothpaste (Colgate) twice a day for four weeks, the group B used a probiotic toothpaste containing Lactobacillus paracasei twice a day for four weeks. Standard oral hygiene instructions were given to all participants. The primary outcome was the mean change in gingival bleeding index (GBI) and plaque index (PI) over four weeks. This was an open-label trial. Only the evaluator was blinded and the evaluation criteria were objective. RESULTS: Forty-four participants, 22 in each group, were finally included and analysed. After the intervention, the probiotic group had a significantly lower median gingival score [0.12 (IQR 0.09, 0.16)] than the control group [0.15 (IQR 0.10, 0.18)], with a p-value of 0.041 (95% CI: 0.009-0.18). However, there was no significant difference in plaque scores between the two groups [Probiotic: 20.0 (IQR 18.0, 21.0) vs. control: 21.0 (IQR 19.0, 22.0), P=0.15]. No significant adverse events or side effects were reported. CONCLUSION: Under the conditions of this trial, the probiotic toothpaste only significantly improved the gingival bleeding index in orthodontic patients compared to regular toothpaste. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrial.gov (NCT06473792).

The microbiota-gut-brain axis (MGBA) is a central nexus that integrates higher cognitive and emotional centers of the central nervous system (CNS) within the intricate functioning of the intestine. Accumulating evidence suggests that dysbiosis in the taxonomic diversity of gut flora plays a salient role in the progression of epilepsy and comorbid secondary complications. METHODS: In the current study, we investigated the impact of long-term oral bacteriotherapy (probiotics; 10 mL/kg; 109 colony-forming unit/ml) as an adjunctive treatment intervention with brivaracetam (BRV; 10 mg/kg) over 21 days on pentylenetetrazole (PTZ) induced augmented epileptic response and associated electrographical and behavioral perturbations in mice. Moreover, we also unveiled antioxidant capacity and histopathologic changes in treated versus non-treated animals. RESULTS: Results revealed combination increases seizure threshold and prevented high ictal spiking. Additionally, it alleviated PTZ-induced neuropsychiatric disturbances such as anxiety and depressive-like phenotype along with cognitive deficits. Furthermore, dual therapy prompted physiological oxidant/antioxidant balance as evidenced by increased activity of antioxidant enzymes (SOD and catalase) and reduced levels of oxidative stressor (MDA). This therapeutic intervention with commensal species suppressed network-driven neuroinflammation and preserved normal cytoarchitecture with intact morphology in the pyramidal layers of cornu ammonis (CA1 and CA3). CONCLUSION: Our study provides supporting evidence for the use of probiotics as adjunctive therapy with anti-seizure medications to modulate epileptogenic processes and related multimorbidities, particularly in individuals with drug-resistant seizures.

Schistosomiasis japonica is a serious threat to human health. It causes damage to the intestine and liver. Probiotic therapy has been shown to be effective in alleviating intestinal diseases and improving host health. Previous studies have found that Bacillus amyloliquefaciens could alleviate the pathological symptoms of schistosomiasis japonica, but the regulatory mechanism of alleviating schistosomiasis japonica is still unknown. PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: This study analyzed the dynamic changes of intestinal microbiome in mice infected with Schistosoma japonicum after the intervention of B. amyloliquefaciens and its connection to host metabolism by multi-omics sequencing technology. B. amyloliquefaciens was found to significantly regulate the homeostasis of intestinal microbiota by promoting the growth of beneficial bacteria and inhibiting potential pathogenic bacteria and protect the number of core microbes. Meanwhile, the genes related to the metabolism of glycerophospholipids and amino acid from intestinal microbiome changed significantly, and were shown to be significantly positively correlated with the associated metabolites of microbial origin. Moreover, host metabolism (lipid metabolism and steroid hormone biosynthesis) was also found to be significantly regulated. CONCLUSIONS: The recovery of intestinal microbial homeostasis and the regulation of host metabolism revealed the potential probiotic properties of B. amyloliquefaciens, which also provided new ideas for the prevention and adjuvant treatment of schistosomiasis japonica.

Dichloroacetate (DCA), a pan-pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitor, ameliorates multiple pathological conditions and tissue injury and shows strong potential for clinical applications. Here, we investigated the preventive effects of DCA in a murine model of alcohol-associated liver disease. METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were subjected to the acute-on-chronic model of alcohol-associated liver disease and treated with DCA. Livers were assessed in liver histology, biochemistry, and gene expression. Mass spectrometry was used to compare protein expression and metabolite levels. RESULTS: DCA inhibited hepatic expression of inflammatory genes but did not prevent steatosis and hepatocellular injury in ethanol-fed mice. Consistently, DCA repressed the expression of mRNAs for inflammatory genes in LPS-stimulated murine bone-marrow-derived macrophages and human monocytic THP-1 cells and inhibited both gene expression and protein release of interleukin-1 beta. DCA prevented hepatic accumulation of isovaleric acid in ethanol-fed mice, a short-chain fatty acid primarily produced by gut microbiota. In vitro, isovaleric acid potentiated LPS's effects, while DCA prevented this proinflammatory action. Ethanol feeding increased the expression of proteins involved in diverse metabolic pathways, including branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) degradation. In ethanol-fed mice, hepatic Fischer's ratio (the molar ratio of BCAAs to aromatic amino acids Phe and Tyr) and BTR (the molar ratio of BCAAs to Tyr) showed a decrease compared to pair-fed mice; however, this decrease was not observed in DCA-treated ethanol-fed mice. DCA blunted the ethanol-induced increase of BCKDHA, the rate-limiting enzyme in BCAA catabolism, and cytochrome P450 2E1. CONCLUSIONS: Ethanol-induced hepatic inflammatory responses and metabolic disturbances were prevented by DCA in mice, indicating the potential to develop pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitors as an effective therapy to treat alcohol-associated liver disease.

Asthma, a prevalent chronic inflammatory respiratory disease among children, was the focus of this study. Serum metabolism profiles were examined in patients diagnosed with both asthma and bronchiolitis by using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. METHODS: In this study, the serum samples from three distinct groups-comprising patients diagnosed with asthma, bronchiolitis, and a healthy control group-underwent comprehensive non-targeted metabolomics analysis and targeted eicosanoid profiling. RESULTS: Through both univariate and multivariate analyses, significant associations were observed between the pathophysiology of both asthma and bronchiolitis and aberrations in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids, amino acids, purines, and pathways involving cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases, indicative of inflammatory processes and immune responses. Furthermore, metabolic changes in phosphatidylethanolamine, saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids, and bile acids were observed in the asthma group. Bronchiolitis was distinguished by disruptions in acyl carnitine and phosphatidylcholine metabolism. CONCLUSION: This study offers a new perspective on understanding the interplay of pathogenic mechanisms underlying both asthma and bronchiolitis. Its findings are significant for enhancing the diagnostic and therapeutic strategies tailored to asthma stemming from bronchiolitis.

Some studies suggest a potential link between intestinal flora and acute pancreatitis (AP). However, the causal relationships between specific intestinal flora and AP, and the possible mediating role of immune cell traits, remain unclear. METHODS: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) involving 5,959 participants was conducted to identify genetic instrumental variables associated with 473 intestinal flora taxa. Summary statistics for AP were obtained from the UK Biobank. Immune cell traits were also identified using large-scale GWAS summary data. We employed a two-sample bidirectional Mendelian randomization (MR) approach to investigate the causal relationships between intestinal flora, immune cell traits, and AP, with inverse variance weighting (IVW) as the primary statistical method. Sensitivity analyses, including the MR-Egger intercept test, Cochran's Q test, MR-PRESSO test, and leave-one-out test, were conducted to assess the robustness of our findings. Additionally, we explored whether immune cell traits mediate the pathway from intestinal flora to AP. RESULTS: 11 positive and 11 negative causal relationships were identified between genetic susceptibility in intestinal flora and AP. Furthermore, 19 positive and 9 negative causal relationships were observed between immune cell traits and AP. Notably, CD38 mediated the causal relationship between Bacillus C and AP. CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to uncover novel causal relationships between various intestinal flora and acute pancreatitis, emphasizing the mediating role of immune cell traits in the pathway from intestinal flora to AP. It also provides new evidence supporting the conditional pathogenicity of the Bacillus genus.

Eligible diarrheal children were randomized into intervention group (IG, n = 57) and control group (CG, n = 54), and given probiotics or placebo, respectively. RESULTS: The total duration of diarrhea in the IG (121.4 ± 13.7 h) was significantly shorter than that in the CG (143.9 ± 19.8 h, p < 0.001). More children in the IG showed improvements in diarrhea than those in the CG for both per protocol analysis (70.2 vs. 46.3%, p = 0.01) and intention-to-treat analysis (66.7 vs. 41.7%, p = 0.003). The LL-37 levels in the IG was markedly higher than that in the CG after the intervention (4349.35 ± 1143.86 pg./g vs. 3682.49 ± 869.21 pg./g, p = 0.039). The intervention led to higher abundance of Bifidobacterium longum and lower abundance of Enterococcus faecium, Lactobacillus rhamnosus, and Bacteroides fragilis (p < 0.05). LRa05 treatment upregulated the functional genes of gut microbiota involving immunity regulation. DISCUSSION: Administration of the Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus LRa05 at a dose of 5 × 109 CFU/day to children aged 0-3 years resulted in shorter duration of diarrhea, faster improvement in fecal consistency, and beneficial changes in gut microbiome composition and gene functions. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: The present study has been approved and registered in the Chinese Clinical Trial Registration Center with the registration number of ChiCTR2100053700 (https://www.chictr.org.cn/showproj.html?proj=141082).

Forty-seven obese middle-aged women (Age: 44.5 ± 5.94 years, body fat percentage: 40.0 ± 4.1%) were recruited and assigned into four groups: control group (C, n = 12), probiotics group (P, n = 12), HIIT group (H, n = 11), and HIIT with probiotics group (HP, n = 12). All the participants consumed probiotics (Lactiplantibacillus plantarum TWK10, 6 × 1010 CFU/day) or placebo supplements daily. Exercise intervention groups conducted HIIT training (85-90% vVO2max for 2 min, followed by a 1-min inactive rest interval, repeated for 7 cycles) 3 sessions per week for 8 weeks. Anthropometry, cardiorespiratory endurance, blood glucose, and lipid profile were measured at baseline and after the 8-week intervention. RESULTS: After the intervention, there were significant changes between groups in the variations and rates of change in waist circumference, hip circumference, and TTE. The waist circumference in group H significantly increased compared to groups C and P, while group HP did not show significant difference compared to group C. On the other hand, the hip circumference decreased significantly in group HP compared to group C, and the decreased rate in group HP was significantly greater than in groups C and P. Furthermore, the increase rates in TTE were higher in group H and HP compared to group C. CONCLUSION: HIIT improves TTE but negatively affects waist circumference compared to the control group. However, when combined with probiotics, the probiotics not only help enhance TTE but also counteract the negative impact on waist circumference and further reduce hip circumference, resulting in a synergistic effect. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT06285578.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is a growing health concern and the risk of its development is connected with the increasing prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MetS) which occurs as a result of some complex obesity-induced metabolic changes. It is a common chronic liver disease characterized by excessive fat accumulation in the liver, the tendency to progress to more severe forms, and a corresponding increase in morbidity and mortality. Thus, effectively addressing the rising burden of the disease requires a thorough understanding of its complex interrelationship with obesity and MetS. MAIN BODY: MASLD results from complex interactions involving obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidaemia, leading to hepatic lipid accumulation, and is influenced by several genetic and environmental factors such as diet and gut microbiota dysbiosis. It has extensive metabolic and non-metabolic implications, including links to MetS components like hyperglycaemia, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia, and progresses to significant liver damage and other extra-hepatic risks like cardiovascular disease and certain cancers. Diagnosis often relies on imaging and histology, with non-invasive methods preferred over liver biopsies. Emerging biomarkers and OMIC technologies offer improved diagnostic capabilities but face practical challenges. Advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), lifestyle interventions, and pharmacological treatments show promise, with future efforts focusing on precision medicine and novel diagnostic tools to improve patient outcome. CONCLUSION: Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the development of MASLD within the context of metabolic syndrome (MetS) is essential for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Advancements in non-invasive diagnostic tools and novel pharmacological treatments, hold promise for improving the management of MASLD. Future research should focus on precision medicine and innovative therapies to effectively address the disease and its consequences.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating neurodegenerative disorder marked by the progressive loss of motor neurons. Recent insights into ALS pathogenesis underscore the pivotal role of the gut microbiome, prompting an investigation into the potential therapeutic impact of fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) on sporadic ALS patients. METHODS: Conducted as a double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, randomized clinical trial, the study enrolled 27 participants from October 2022 to April 2023. The participants were followed up for 6 months from February 2023 to October 2023, during in-person visits at baseline, week 15, week 23, and week 35. The participants, evenly randomized, received either healthy donor FMT (FMT, n = 14) or a mixture of 0.9% saline and food coloring (E150c) as sham transplantation (placebo, n = 13). The primary outcome measured the change in the ALS Functional Rating Scale-Revised (ALSFRS-R) total score from baseline to week 35. Secondary outcomes included changes in gastrointestinal and respiratory functions, muscle strength, autonomic function, cognition, quality of life, intestinal microbiome composition, and plasm neurofilament light chain protein (NFL). Efficacy and safety outcomes were assessed in the intention-to-treat population. RESULTS: A total of 27 randomized patients (47% women; mean age, 67.2 years), 24 participants completed the entire study. Notably, ALSFRS-R score changes exhibited no significant differences between FMT (6.1 [SD, 3.11]) and placebo (6.41[SD, 2.73]) groups from baseline to week 35. Secondary efficacy outcomes, encompassing respiratory function, muscle strength, autonomic function, cognition, quality of life, and plasm NFL, showed no significant differences. Nevertheless, the FMT group exhibited improvements in constipation, depression, and anxiety symptoms. FMT induced a shift in gut microbiome community composition, marked by increased abundance of Bifidobacterium, which persisted until week 15 (95% CI, 0.04 to 0.28; p = 0.01). Gastrointestinal adverse events were the primary manifestations of FMT-related side effects. CONCLUSIONS: In this clinical trial involving 27 sporadic ALS patients, FMT did not significantly slow the decline in ALSFRS-R score. Larger multicenter trials are needed to confirm the efficacy of FMT in sporadic ALS patients and to explore the underlying biological mechanisms. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Chinese Clinical Trial Registry Identifier: ChiCTR 2200064504.

Precision nutrition is based on the integration of individual´s phenotypical and biological characteristics including genetic variants, epigenetic marks, gut microbiota profiles and metabolites fingerprints as well as medical history, lifestyle practices, and environmental and cultural factors. Thus, nutriomics areas including Nutrigenomics, Nutrigenetics, Nutriepigenetics, Nutrimetabolomics, and Nutrimetagenomics have emerged to comprehensively understand the complex interactions between nutrients, diet, and the human body's molecular processes through precision nutrition. SUMMARY: This document from the Ibero-American Network of Nutriomics and Precision Nutrition (RINN22; https://rinn22.com/) provides a comprehensive overview of the concepts of precision nutrition approaches to guide their application in clinical and public health as well as establish the position of RINN22 regarding the current and future state of precision nutrition. KEY MESSAGES: The progress and participation of nutriomics to precision nutrition is an essential pillar for addressing diet-related diseases and developing innovative managing strategies, which will be promoted by advances in bioinformatics, machine learning and integrative software as well as the description of specific novel biomarkers. In this context, synthesizing and critically evaluating the latest developments, potential applications and future needs in the field of nutrition is necessary with a holistic perspective, incorporating progress in omics technologies aimed at precision nutrition interventions. This approach must address and confront healthy, social, food security, physically active lifestyle, sanitation and sustainability challenges with preventive, participatory, and predictive strategies of personalized, population and planetary nutrition for a precision tailored health.

It was observed that most studies on HIV ART and associated gut microbiota have been cross-sectional, and the findings, in general, showed significant damages caused by the ART to the gut microbial community (dysbiosis), with the impact varying in different studies. These changes also revealed dysfunction in microbial translocation and some immune markers, including T lymphocyte rates and the overall inflammation balance. CONCLUSIONS: There are significant gaps in our understanding of the impact of HIV ART on gut microbiota. Thus, a longitudinal study is likely needed with a considerable sample size from different settings and classes of ART to better understand the impact of HIV ART on the gut microbiota, and develop remedial (restorative) and adjunctive host-directed strategies during HIV ART.

Previous studies have shown that microbial communities differ in obese and lean individuals, and dietary fiber can help reduce obesity-related conditions through diet-gut microbiota interactions. However, the mechanisms by which dietary fibers shape the gut microbiota still need to be elucidated. In this in vitro study, we examined how apple fibers affect lean and obese microbial communities on a global scale. We employed a high-throughput micro-matrix bioreactor system and a multi-omics approach to identify the key microorganisms and metabolites involved in this process. RESULTS: Initially, metagenomics and metabolomics data indicated that obese and lean microbial communities had distinct starting microbial communities. We found that obese microbial community had different characteristics, including higher levels of Ruminococcus bromii and lower levels of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, along with an increased Firmicutes:Bacteroides ratio. Afterward, we exposed obese and lean microbial communities to an apple as a representative complex food matrix, apple pectin as a soluble fiber, and cellulose as an insoluble fiber. Dietary fibers, particularly apple pectin, reduced Acidaminococcus intestini and boosted Megasphaera and Akkermansia in the obese microbial community. Additionally, these fibers altered the production of metabolites, increasing beneficial indole microbial metabolites. Our results underscored the ability of apple and apple pectin to shape the obese gut microbiota. CONCLUSION: We found that the obese microbial community had higher branched-chain amino acid catabolism and hexanoic acid production, potentially impacting energy balance. Apple dietary fibers, especially pectin, influenced the obese microbial community, altering both species and metabolites. Notably, the apple pectin feeding condition affected species like Klebsiella pneumoniae and Bifidobacterium longum. By using genome-scale metabolic modeling, we discovered a mutualistic cross-feeding relationship between Megasphaera sp. MJR8396C and Bifidobacterium adolescentis. This in vitro study suggests that incorporating apple fibers into the diets of obese individuals can help modify the composition of gut bacteria and improve metabolic health. This personalized approach could help mitigate the effects of obesity. Video Abstract.

The gut microbiota (GM) plays a critical role in regulating human physiology, with dysbiosis linked to various diseases, including heart failure (HF). HF is a complex syndrome with a significant global health impact, as its incidence doubles with each decade of life, and its prevalence peaks in individuals over 80 years. A bidirectional interaction exists between GM and HF, where alterations in gut health can worsen the disease's progression. MAIN BODY: The "gut hypothesis of HF" suggests that HF-induced changes, such as reduced intestinal perfusion and altered gut motility, negatively impact GM composition, leading to increased intestinal permeability, the release of GM-derived metabolites into the bloodstream, and systemic inflammation. This process creates a vicious cycle that further deteriorates heart function. GM-derived metabolites, including trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO), short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), and secondary bile acids (BAs), can influence gene expression through epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation and histone modifications. These epigenetic changes may play a crucial role in mediating the effects of dysbiotic gut microbial metabolites, linking them to altered cardiac health and contributing to the progression of HF. This process is particularly relevant in older individuals, as the aging process itself has been associated with both dysbiosis and cumulative epigenetic alterations, intensifying the interplay between GM, epigenetic changes, and HF, and further increasing the risk of HF in the elderly. CONCLUSION: Despite the growing body of evidence, the complex interplay between GM, epigenetic modifications, and HF remains poorly understood. The dynamic nature of epigenetics and GM, shaped by various factors such as age, diet, and lifestyle, presents significant challenges in elucidating the precise mechanisms underlying this complex relationship. Future research should prioritize innovative approaches to overcome these limitations. By identifying specific metabolite-induced epigenetic modifications and modulating the composition and function of GM, novel and personalized therapeutic strategies for the prevention and/or treatment of HF can be developed. Moreover, targeted research focusing specifically on older individuals is crucial for understanding the intricate connections between GM, epigenetics, and HF during aging.

The gut microbiota of venous thromboembolism (VTE) patients exhibited significant alterations. However, the causal relationship between gut microbiota and VTE has not been fully understood. This study aimed to assess the causal relationship between gut microbiota and the risk of VTE using a two-sample Mendelian Randomization (MR) study. METHODS: The gut microbiota and VTE genetic data were collected from the MiBioGen consortium and the UK biobank, respectively. The potential causal relationship between gut microbiota and VTE was investigated using a two-sample MR analysis, including inverse variance weighted (IVW), weighted median, MR-Egger, simple mode, and weighted mode methods. Cochran's Q-test, MR-PRESSO, and MR-Egger regression intercept analysis were utilized to perform sensitivity analysis. RESULTS: At the genus level, the results of MR analysis found that Coprococcus1 (OR: 1.0029, 95% CI: 1.0005-1.0054, p = 0.0202) was suggestively linked with an increased risk of VTE, while Slackia (odds ratio (OR): 0.9977, 95% confidence interval (CI): 0.9957-0.9998, p = 0.0298), Butyricicoccus (OR: 0.9971, 95% CI: 0.9945-0.9997, p = 0.0309), Eubacterium coprostanoligenes group (OR: 0.9972, 95% CI: 0.9946-0.9999, p = 0.0445), and Bacteroides (OR: 0.9964, 95% CI: 0.9932-0.9995, p = 0.0234) were suggestively associated with a reduced risk of VTE. No heterogeneity and horizontal pleiotropy was detected. CONCLUSION: This study found that there were potential causal relationships between five gut microbiota and VTE. Our findings may provide new insights into the mechanisms of VTE.

The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral reservoir remain poorly understood. RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research field. CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an effective cure for HIV.

Chronic apical periodontitis (CAP) has been linked to the development of atherosclerosis, although the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. This study aimed to investigate the role of gut microbiota disruption in CAP-induced atherosclerosis development, focusing on trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO)-related metabolites. METHODS: The study utilized fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) to transfer gut microbiota from mice with CAP to healthy mice. Atherosclerosis development was assessed by analyzing lesions in the aortic arch and aortic root. Serum lipid and inflammatory factor levels were measured. Composition and diversity of gut microbiota were analyzed using targeted metabolomics, with a focus on the ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes. The expression of hepatic flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) and serum TMAO levels were also evaluated. RESULTS: Mice receiving gut microbiota from CAP mice showed increased atherosclerotic lesions compared to controls, without significant differences in serum lipid or inflammatory factor levels. Alterations in gut microbiota composition were observed, characterized by an increase in the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio. Peptostreptococcaceae abundance positively correlated with atherosclerosis severity, while Odoribacteraceae showed a negative correlation. No significant differences were found in hepatic FMO3 expression or serum TMAO levels. CONCLUSIONS: The study confirms the role of gut microbiota disruption in CAP-mediated atherosclerosis development, independent of serum lipid or TMAO levels. Alterations in gut microbiota composition, particularly increased Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio and specific bacterial families, were associated with atherosclerosis severity. These findings highlight the intricate interplay between gut microbiota and cardiovascular health in the context of CAP.

Utilizing the Lieber-DeCarli method, C57BL/6J male mice were subjected to a four-week liquid alcohol diet to induce ALD. The mechanism of NOB alleviating ALD is explored by detecting biochemical analysis, western blot, qRT-PCR, and gut microbiota analysis. RESULTS: In vivo, it was observed that NOB treatment (2.5 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg) significantly alleviated alcohol-induced liver inflammation, accompanied by normalization of aberrant gene and protein expression patterns associated with inflammation. Notably, this treatment also enhanced intestinal barrier integrity, resulting in decreased intestinal LPS permeability and a subsequent reduction in ileum inflammation. Furthermore, 16 S rRNA analysis demonstrated that NOB effectively ameliorated alcohol-induced gut microbiota dysbiosis by restoring the balance between Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes and promoting the growth of beneficial bacterial families like Akkermansiaceae. In vitro, utilizing LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells, NOB's efficacy in mitigating liver inflammation was further corroborated. Specifically, the treatment was found to exert its anti-inflammatory effects through modulation of the NF-κB/TLR4 signaling pathway. CONCLUSION: our study has made significant progress in understanding NOB's hepatoprotective effects on alcohol-induced ALD mice. This perspective not only clarifies NOB's therapeutic role in ALD management but also inspires future research on additional gut-liver axis indicators for a comprehensive exploration of NOB's therapeutic potential.

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a global health problem with limited therapeutic options. The biochemical mechanisms that lead to this disorder are not yet fully understood, and in this respect, metabolomics represents a promising approach to decipher metabolic events related to AUD. The plasma metabolome contains a plethora of bioactive molecules that reflects the functional changes in host metabolism but also the impact of the gut microbiome and nutritional habits. METHODS: In this study, we investigated the impact of severe AUD (sAUD), and of a 3-week period of alcohol abstinence, on the blood metabolome (non-targeted LC-MS metabolomics analysis) in 96 sAUD patients hospitalized for alcohol withdrawal. RESULTS: We found that the plasma levels of different lipids ((lyso)phosphatidylcholines, long-chain fatty acids), short-chain fatty acids (i.e. 3-hydroxyvaleric acid) and bile acids were altered in sAUD patients. In addition, several microbial metabolites, including indole-3-propionic acid, p-cresol sulfate, hippuric acid, pyrocatechol sulfate, and metabolites belonging to xanthine class (paraxanthine, theobromine and theophylline) were sensitive to alcohol exposure and alcohol withdrawal. 3-Hydroxyvaleric acid, caffeine metabolites (theobromine, paraxanthine, and theophylline) and microbial metabolites (hippuric acid and pyrocatechol sulfate) were correlated with anxiety, depression and alcohol craving. Metabolomics analysis in postmortem samples of frontal cortex and cerebrospinal fluid of those consuming a high level of alcohol revealed that those metabolites can be found also in brain tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Our data allow the identification of neuroactive metabolites, from interactions between food components and microbiota, which may represent new targets arising in the management of neuropsychiatric diseases such as sAUD. FUNDING: Gut2Behave project was initiated from ERA-NET NEURON network (Joint Transnational Call 2019) and was financed by Academy of Finland, French National Research Agency (ANR-19-NEUR-0003-03) and the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FRS-FNRS; PINT-MULTI R.8013.19, Belgium). Metabolomics analysis of the TSDS samples was supported by grant from the Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies.

Alcohol drinking and gut microbiota are related to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the specific relationship between them remains unclear. AIMS: We aimed to establish the alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis and develop machine learning (ML) models in predicting the occurrence of early-stage HCC. METHODS: Two hundred sixty-nine patients with early-stage HCC and 278 controls were recruited. Alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis was established through the mediation/moderation effect analyses. Eight ML algorithms including Classification and Regression Tree (CART), Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), Neural Network (NN), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) were applied. RESULTS: A total of 160 pairs of individuals were included for analyses. The mediation effects of Genus_Catenibacterium (P = 0.024), Genus_Tyzzerella_4 (P < 0.001), and Species_Tyzzerella_4 (P = 0.020) were discovered. The moderation effects of Family_Enterococcaceae (OR = 0.741, 95%CI:0.160-0.760, P = 0.017), Family_Leuconostocaceae (OR = 0.793, 95%CI:0.486-3.593, P = 0.010), Genus_Enterococcus (OR = 0.744, 95%CI:0.161-0.753, P = 0.017), Genus_Erysipelatoclostridium (OR = 0.693, 95%CI:0.062-0.672, P = 0.032), Genus_Lactobacillus (OR = 0.655, 95%CI:0.098-0.749, P = 0.011), Species_Enterococcus_faecium (OR = 0.692, 95%CI:0.061-0.673, P = 0.013), and Species_Lactobacillus (OR = 0.653, 95%CI:0.086-0.765, P = 0.014) were uncovered. The predictive power of eight ML models was satisfactory (AUCs:0.855-0.932). The XGBoost model had the best predictive ability (AUC = 0.932). CONCLUSIONS: ML models based on the alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis are valuable in predicting the occurrence of early-stage HCC.

Noninvasive sampling and 16S rRNA high-throughput sequencing were used to compare the composition and function of the gut microbiota of three dog breeds: the Chinese Kunming dog (CKD), German Shepherd dog (GSD), and Belgian Malinois dog (BMD). RESULTS: The gut microbiota of the three dog breeds consisted of 257 species across 146 genera, 60 families, 35 orders, 15 classes, and 10 phyla. The dominant bacterial phyla across the three breeds were Firmicutes (57.44%), Fusobacteriota (28.86%), and Bacteroidota (7.63%), while the dominant bacterial genera across the three breeds were Peptostreptococcus (21.08%), Fusobacterium (18.50%), Lactobacillus (12.37%), and Cetobacter (10.29%). Further analysis revealed significant differences in the intestinal flora of the three breeds at the phylum and genus levels. The intestinal flora of BMD was significantly richer than that of CKD and GSD. The functional prediction and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes analysis showed that the primary functions of the gut microbiota in these breeds were similar, with significant enrichment in various metabolic pathways, including carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism, secondary metabolite biosynthesis, and microbial metabolism in different environments. The intestinal flora of these breeds also played a crucial role in genetic information processing, including transcription, translation, replication, and material transport. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These results provide novel insights into the intestinal flora of intervention dogs and suggest novel methods to improve their health status, which help increase microbial diversity and normalize metabolite production in diseased dogs.

Fecal samples were collected from 55 wild KWD of varying age and sex. Aerobic bacteria were cultured at 37°C for 24-48 h under standard conditions, whereas anaerobic bacteria were cultured at 37°C for 48-72 h in an anaerobic environment. Bacterial identification was conducted using DNA extraction and polymerase chain reaction amplification targeting the 16S rRNA gene. RESULTS: The predominant aerobic bacteria identified belonged to the Firmicutes (58.18%) and Proteobacteria (41.82%) phyla, with Escherichia coli (31.82%) and Bacillus cereus (31.82%) being the most common species. Among anaerobic bacteria, most belonged to the Firmicutes (71.03%), Proteobacteria (27.10%), and Fusobacteriota (1.87%) phyla, with Paraclostridium bifermentans (28.97%) and E. coli (22.43%) being the most prevalent species. Other frequently identified anaerobic species were Fusobacterium varium, Lactococcus garvieae, Terrisporobacter glycolicus, Enterococcus faecalis, and Clostridium sporogenes. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our findings indicate a diverse microbial community in the feces of water deer, offering valuable insights into their gut microbiota and its potential implications for health and ecology.

The effect of LR on UC was analyzed by using dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced UC model in mice (n = 9). To assess the therapeutic effect of LR on UC in mice, the disease activity index (DAI) of mice, histopathological alterations, intestinal epithelial barrier integrity, and intestinal microflora were determined. RESULTS: The results demonstrated a reduction in the DSS-induced DAI in UC mice. Additionally, it mitigated colon shortening, minimized intestinal tissue damage, and preserved intestinal tight junction proteins (Claudin-3, Occludin, and ZO-1). LR reduced the levels of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IL-6, and TNF-α) and oxidative mediators (MPO, SOD and MDA) in the colon of UC mice, which could also alleviate the imbalance of intestinal flora in UC mice, increase the abundance of Prevotellaceae, and Ligilactobacillus, and decrease the abundance of Bacteroidaceae and Eubacteriumrum. LR can also increase the levels of PPARγ in the nucleus and inhibit the MAPK/NF-ĸB signaling pathway in UC mice. Besides, the reduction of the content of short-chain fatty acid (SCFAs) in the colon of UC mice was relieved. CONCLUSION: The above results forge a scientific basis for LR as natural anti-inflammatory food to improve the imbalance of inflammatory intestinal flora and promote intestinal health.

Most infants with febrile urinary tract infection (UTI) do not have an underlying anatomical risk factor. Thus, other non-anatomical risk factors should be considered. Since the most common pathogens arise from the fecal microbiota, our aim was to investigate whether the gut microbiota composition differs between febrile infants younger than 2 months with or without UTI. METHODS: In this prospective, case-control, pilot study, we performed 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid amplicon sequencing to characterize gut microbiota of febrile neonates with and without UTI admitted to the pediatric ward at Shamir Medical Center between February 2019 and May 2021. RESULTS: The study cohort included 42 febrile neonates: 17 with and 25 without febrile UTI. We found a significant difference in beta diversity (i.e. between-sample/study group similarity indices) between the UTI and non-UTI group (p = 0.016). There were also distinct differences in the relative abundance of the 20 most prevalent genera. Furthermore, several genera were significantly enriched in the UTI group, with others dominating the non-UTI group. Streptococci were underrepresented in the UTI group. There was no difference in alpha diversity (i.e. within-sample diversity/richness) between groups. CONCLUSION: Febrile neonates with UTI have a different fecal microbiota composition (beta-diversity), but not alpha diversity, in comparison to febrile neonates without UTI. A larger study is warranted to confirm these findings and their potential applications.

In the American Gut Project Database, 361 individuals (without troubled by disease recently) with less than 6 h of sleep per day were obtained and matched with normal sleep time individuals according to gender, age, and BMI. Furthermore, the raw data of 16s rRNA in feces were downloaded and analyzed using QIIME2, and STAMP was used for data statistics. PICRUST2 was used for predicting the alteration of microbial function. RESULTS: The SSD did not affect the microbial α-diversity. SSD increased the abundance of the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the families Rikenellaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and S24-7, and decrased the Coriobacteriaceae. Moreover, PICRUST2 predicted that SSD affected 15 metabolic pathways. Subgroup analyses showed that SSD had more significant effects on the microbiota in normal-weight females. CONCLUSION: SSD substantially modifies the abundance of specific gut microbiota taxa, exerting a pronounced influence particularly on females, highlighting the need for further investigation into the bidirectional relationship between sleep patterns and gut microbiota.

The prevalence of obesity and its related ailments is on the rise, posing a substantial challenge to public health. Tea, widely enjoyed for its flavors, has shown notable potential in mitigating obesity. Yet, there remains a lack of exhaustive bibliometric studies in this domain. METHODS: We retrieved and analyzed multidimensional data concerning tea and obesity studies from January 2004 to June 2024, using the Web of Science Core Collection database. This bibliometric investigation utilized tools such as Bibliometrix, CiteSpace, and VOSviewer to gather and analyze data concerning geographical distribution, leading institutions, prolific authors, impactful journals, citation patterns, and prevalent keywords. RESULTS: There has been a significant surge in publications relevant to this field within the last two decades. Notably, China, Hunan Agricultural University, and the journal Food and Function have emerged as leading contributors in terms of country, institution, and publication medium, respectively. Zhonghua Liu of Hunan Agricultural University has the distinction of most publications, whereas Joshua D. Lambert of The State University of New Jersey is the most cited author. Analyses of co-citations and frequently used keywords have identified critical focus areas within tea anti-obesity research. Current studies are primarily aimed at understanding the roles of tea components in regulating gut microbiota, boosting fat oxidation, and increasing metabolic rate. The research trajectory has progressed from preliminary mechanism studies and clinical trials to more sophisticated investigations into the mechanisms, particularly focusing on tea's regulatory effects on gut microbiota. CONCLUSION: This study offers an intricate overview of the prevailing conditions, principal focus areas, and developmental trends in the research of tea's role against obesity. It delivers a comprehensive summary and discourse on the recent progress in this field, emphasizing the study's core findings and pivotal insights. Highlighting tea's efficacy in obesity prevention and treatment, this study also points out the critical need for continued research in this area.

An OVX rat model was established to evaluate the intervention effects of XLJGR. The measured indicators included bone density, serum bone metabolism markers, and an analysis of the types and abundances of intestinal microbiota, along with changes in endogenous metabolites. Additionally, MC3T3-E1 cells were used to validate the differential metabolites. RESULTS: XLJGR significantly reduced the abundance of Bacteroides, Butyricicoccus, and other bacterial strains in the gut. KEGG metabolic pathway enrichment analysis showed that XLJGR intervention led to notable changes in pathways such as peptidoglycan biosynthesis, carbapenem biosynthesis, and vancomycin resistance. Moreover, XLJGR significantly upregulated key intestinal microbiota metabolites, including gabapentin(GAB), camphoric acid(CAA), and nonanedioic acid(AZA), thereby promoting the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells. DISCUSSION: This study highlights the potential biomedical applications of XLJGR in promoting bone health by positively affecting intestinal microbiota and metabolic characteristics. These findings suggest that XLJGR may serve as a viable alternative in the treatment of osteoporosis, warranting further exploration of its therapeutic mechanisms and clinical applications.

Acquiring sufficient knowledge and understanding the importance of intestinal microbiota and probiotics in health and disease, as well as their potential for interactions with concurrently administered drugs, can significantly influence future pharmacotherapeutic practices among health science students. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to assess the knowledge, factors influencing knowledge, attitudes, and practices regarding intestinal microbiota and probiotics and their interactions with drugs among students of the Faculty of Medicine in Novi Sad. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted in the form of an anonymous questionnaire among first- and final-year medical and pharmacy students. Predictors of knowledge scores were analyzed using a negative binomial regression model. RESULTS: The questionnaire was completed by 263 medical and pharmacy students (44.58% first-year and 55.5% final-year students). Approximately half of the students (53.2%) demonstrated fair knowledge, 34.2% had poor knowledge, and only 12.5% had good knowledge about the intestinal microbiota and probiotics. Study year and self-assessment of knowledge were statistically significant predictors of knowledge scores, while the presence of chronic diseases, previous education, and lifestyle were not. The most common indications for probiotic use among respondents were antibiotic use (75.4%) and gastrointestinal symptoms (69.9%). A large number of respondents reported not paying attention to the concurrent use of probiotics with drugs or food, nor to the choice of specific probiotic strains. Most students expressed that they receive insufficient information on this topic at the university. CONCLUSION: Most students demonstrate inadequate knowledge about the gut microbiota and probiotics, which affects their practical use of these supplements. The primary reasons for this are insufficient information and unreliable sources of information. Therefore, enhancing education on this topic could significantly improve the knowledge and pharmacotherapeutic practices of future healthcare professionals.

Bile acid species were analyzed in serum and fecal samples from a randomized, double-blind, double-dummy trial at baseline and after 3 and 6 weeks of orally administered colesevelam (1,875 mg twice daily, n = 26) or subcutaneously administered liraglutide (uptitrated by weekly increments of 0.6 mg from 0.6 to 1.8 mg daily, n = 26) in patients with 75 selenium-homotaurocholic acid test-verified, idiopathic, or postcholecystectomy bile acid diarrhea. Fecal microbiota composition was analyzed by 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing at the same time points. RESULTS: Colesevelam increased the fecal concentrations of all bile acid species, whereas it decreased serum concentrations of secondary bile acids. Liraglutide induced a small increase in serum unconjugated bile acid concentrations without affecting fecal bile acid concentrations. No changes in fecal microbiota composition were observed with either treatment. DISCUSSION: Colesevelam and liraglutide exhibit distinct effects on serum and fecal bile acid concentrations with colesevelam reducing serum concentrations of secondary bile acids and promoting fecal bile acid excretion, whereas liraglutide enhances serum concentrations of unconjugated bile acids, potentially through deceleration of small intestinal transit time allowing more time for passive absorption of bile acids.

In the American Gut Project Database, 361 individuals (without troubled by disease recently) with less than 6 h of sleep per day were obtained and matched with normal sleep time individuals according to gender, age, and BMI. Furthermore, the raw data of 16s rRNA in feces were downloaded and analyzed using QIIME2, and STAMP was used for data statistics. PICRUST2 was used for predicting the alteration of microbial function. RESULTS: The SSD did not affect the microbial α-diversity. SSD increased the abundance of the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the families Rikenellaceae, Verrucomicrobiaceae, and S24-7, and decrased the Coriobacteriaceae. Moreover, PICRUST2 predicted that SSD affected 15 metabolic pathways. Subgroup analyses showed that SSD had more significant effects on the microbiota in normal-weight females. CONCLUSION: SSD substantially modifies the abundance of specific gut microbiota taxa, exerting a pronounced influence particularly on females, highlighting the need for further investigation into the bidirectional relationship between sleep patterns and gut microbiota.

Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging remain unknown. METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging. CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential therapeutic targets.

A total of 60 gut microbiome samples (16S rRNA sequences) were analyzed, with 44 from children with ASD and 16 from neurotypical children. Four machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Classification, Gradient Boosting, and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier) were applied to create eight classification models based on bacterial abundance at the genus level and KEGG pathways. Model accuracy was evaluated, and an external dataset was introduced to test model generalizability. RESULTS: The highest classification accuracy (80%) was achieved with Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier using genus-level taxa. The Random Forest model also performed well (78%) with KEGG pathways. When tested on an independent dataset, the model maintained high accuracy (79%), confirming its generalizability. CONCLUSIONS: This study identified significant microbial differences between neurotypical children and children with ASD. Machine learning classifiers, particularly Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier, achieved strong accuracy. Validation with external data demonstrated that the models could generalize across different datasets, highlighting their potential use.

There is a growing interest in understanding the association between the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration in an experimental colitis model. METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted. RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal linings. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

Tea leaf blight leads to an increase in bacterial diversity in the rhizosphere. Random processes dominate the assembly of abundant and rare taxa, while abundant taxa are also influenced by deterministic processes. In the co-occurrence network, the increase in bacterial community diversity mediated by tea cloud leaf blight enhances the stability of the network. Meanwhile, the proportion of positive correlation between rare taxa is relatively high, and the relationship between rare taxa and intermediate taxa is closer. This highly diverse bacteria community maintained the structure and stability of the community to a certain extent. CONCLUSION: The rare taxa in the rhizosphere and the rhizosphere bacterial community mediated by tea leaf blight have high diversity, which is of great significance for maintaining the stability of the rhizosphere bacterial ecological network. In the future, we will further explore the dynamic changes and interaction patterns of the species in the rhizosphere soil affected by tea tree diseases, and their ecological functions and importance in areas of habitat fragmentation. Overall, there are many microbial resources in the rhizosphere microbiota under the influence of plant diseases that can be used for agricultural practice. The results of this study will enrich the insights into ecodynamics of bacteria in karst areas, especially in karst tea gardens.

The association between alterations in the oral microbiome and hand, foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) has been observed in previous studies. Our study, therefore, aimed to identify the structural changes in the oral microbiota and biomarkers in children with HFMD caused by enterovirus A 71 (EV-A71). METHODS: Children diagnosed with EV-A71 HFMD and healthy children recruited from April 2021 to September 2023 were included in the present study, and were categorized into EV-A71 and control groups, respectively. Oral swabs were collected and microbiota information was obtained using 16 S rRNA gene sequencing technology. Alpha-diversity and partial least squares discriminant analyses were conducted to compare microbial diversity, richness, and similarity between the two groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size was employed to identify microbial taxa with significant differences, and determined the key genera among them. RESULTS: The study included a total of 80 children, with 50 assigned to the EV-A71 group and 30 to the control group. No significant differences were found between the two groups in terms of age (2.2 ± 1.2 vs. 2.7 ± 1.2 years; age range: 1-5 years; P = 0.114) or sex (56% vs. 60% boys, P = 0.726). The oral microbiota structure in the EV-A71 group differed from that in the control group. The EV-A71 group showed significant reductions in both the Shannon index (P = 0.037) and the abundance-based coverage estimator (ACE) index (P < 0.001). The key genus changes were marked by a significant decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga (P = 0.002) and Leptotrichia (P = 0.033) in the EV-A71 group. CONCLUSION: In children with EV-A71 HFMD, the oral microbiota showed changes in composition, with a significant reduction in diversity and richness. The changes in key genera were a marked decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga and Leptotrichia.

Male mice receiving pyridostigmine bromide (PB) orally, and controls were evaluated for symptoms of GWI at 8 weeks post-treatment. The Kansas criteria were adapted to assess behaviors associated with the following domains: gastrointestinal alterations, pain, mood, cognitive function, skin and respiratory disturbances. PB-treated subjects were classified into susceptible (GWI-S) or resilient (GWI-R). The status of the gut microbiome was assessed via analyses of the 16S rRNA gene and microbial-derived metabolites were evaluated with metabolomics tools. KEY FINDINGS: Our results indicate that application of the Kansas criteria to behavioral outcomes in PB-treated mice resulted in a GWI susceptibility rate of ~35 %, similar to the one reported in humans. The composition and structure of the gut microbiome was different in GWI-S subjects compared to both control and GWI-R mice at 8 weeks but differences in microbial community structure were observed prior to PB treatment between GWI-R and GWI-S mice. GWI-S subjects exhibited a pattern of differentially abundant bacterial taxa and microbial metabolites. SIGNIFICANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first preclinical report in which a stratification by susceptibility to GWI and its association with the gut microbiome is described. In light of the research conundrum that vulnerability to GWI represents, the use of tools that could provide further insight into this complex factor should be considered.

The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome. METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA gene markers. RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the Eukaryotic community. CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa (Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as antibiotic use.

The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented. METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were performed. RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data. CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen. TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) is one of the most efficient therapeutic options available to cure many hematological malignancies. However, severe complications derived from this procedure, including graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and infections, can limit its success and negatively impact survival. Previous studies have shown that alterations in the microbiome are associated with the development of allo-HSCT-derived complications. However, most studies relied on single techniques that can only analyze a unique aspect of the microbiome, which hinders our ability to understand how microbiome alterations drive allo-HSCT-associated diseases. RESULTS: Here, we have applied multiple "omic" techniques (16S rRNA and shotgun sequencing, targeted and un-targeted metabolomics) in combination with machine learning approaches to define the most significant microbiome changes following allo-HSCT at multiple modalities (bacterial taxa, encoded functions, and derived metabolites). In addition, multivariate approaches were applied to study interactions among the various microbiome modalities (the interactome). Our results show that the microbiome of transplanted patients exhibits substantial changes in all studied modalities. These include depletion of beneficial microbes, mainly from the Clostridiales order, loss of their bacterial encoded functions required for the synthesis of key metabolites, and a reduction in metabolic end products such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These changes were followed by an expansion of bacteria that frequently cause infections after allo-HSCT, including several Staphylococcus species, which benefit from the reduction of bacteriostatic SCFAs. Additionally, we found specific alterations in all microbiome modalities that distinguished those patients who subsequently developed GVHD, including depletion of anti-inflammatory commensals, protective reactive oxygen detoxifying enzymes, and immunoregulatory metabolites such as acetate or malonate. Moreover, extensive shifts in the homeostatic relationship between bacteria and their metabolic products (e.g., Faecalibacterium and butyrate) were detected mainly in patients who later developed GVHD. CONCLUSIONS: We have identified specific microbiome changes at different modalities (microbial taxa, their encoded genes, and synthetized metabolites) and at the interface between them (the interactome) that precede the development of complications associated with allo-HSCT. These identified microbial features provide novel targets for the design of microbiome-based strategies to prevent diseases associated with stem cell transplantation. Video Abstract.

Lifestyle plays an important role in shaping the gut microbiome. However, its contributions to the oral microbiome remain less clear, due to the confounding effects of geography and methodology in investigations of populations studied to date. Furthermore, while the oral microbiome seems to differ between foraging and industrialized populations, we lack insight into whether transitions to and away from agrarian lifestyles shape the oral microbiota. Given the growing interest in so-called "vanishing microbiomes" potentially being a risk factor for increased disease prevalence in industrialized populations, it is important that we distinguish lifestyle from geography in the study of microbiomes across populations. RESULTS: Here, we investigate salivary microbiomes of 63 Nepali individuals representing a spectrum of lifestyles: foraging, subsistence farming (individuals that transitioned from foraging to farming within the last 50 years), agriculturalists (individuals that have transitioned to farming for at least 300 years), and industrialists (expatriates that immigrated to the USA within the last 20 years). We characterize the role of lifestyle in microbial diversity, identify microbes that differ between lifestyles, and pinpoint specific lifestyle factors that may be contributing to differences in the microbiomes across populations. Contrary to prevailing views, when geography is controlled for, oral microbiome alpha diversity does not differ significantly across lifestyles. Microbiome composition, however, follows the gradient of lifestyles from foraging through agrarianism to industrialism, supporting the notion that lifestyle indeed plays a role in the oral microbiome. Relative abundances of several individual taxa, including Streptobacillus and an unclassified Porphyromonadaceae genus, also mirror lifestyle. Finally, we identify specific lifestyle factors associated with microbiome composition across the gradient of lifestyles, including smoking and grain sources. CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that by studying populations within Nepal, we can isolate an important role of lifestyle in determining oral microbiome composition. In doing so, we highlight the potential contributions of several lifestyle factors, underlining the importance of carefully examining the oral microbiome across lifestyles to improve our understanding of global microbiomes. Video Abstract.

Ticks are vectors of numerous pathogens, with their bacterial composition, abundance, diversity, and interaction influencing both their growth and disease transmission efficiency. Despite the abundance of ticks in Inner Mongolia, China, comprehensive data on their microbial communities are lacking. This study aims to analyze the microbial communities within ticks from Inner Mongolia to inform innovative control strategies for interrupting pathogen transmission. METHODS: Tick samples were collected from animals and vegetation in multiple locations across Inner Mongolia and stored at - 80 °C. Ticks were identified using morphological keys and molecular biology methods. Full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed on collected samples. Bacterial community composition and diversity were mainly analyzed using bioinformatic tools such as QIIME, phyloseq, and DESeq2. Alpha diversity was assessed using Chao1, ACE, and Shannon indices, while beta diversity was evaluated using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices. LEfSe analysis was applied to identify taxa associated with ecological and biological variables. RESULTS: A total of 5,048,137 high-quality read counts were obtained, forming an average of 789.3 OTUs per sample. Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes were the most dominant phyla. Bacterial community composition varied significantly with geography, with Dermacentor nuttalli showing a higher abundance of Rickettsia in Xilingol League, while other regions had different dominant genera. The microbial community also differed based on the feeding status of ticks. Additionally, the microbiota of engorged ticks showed organ specificity. Pathogen detection efforts revealed the presence of nine pathogens across all three tick species. D. nuttalli was found to carry a significantly higher burden of pathogenic bacteria, making it the most potentially threatening tick species in Inner Mongolia. CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights significant variations in tick microbiomes influenced by geographic location, feeding status, and tick species. It underscores the importance of enhancing tick and tick-borne disease surveillance in Inner Mongolia for early detection and control of emerging pathogens.

Cervical ripening is a multifactorial outcome, and the association between cervical ripening and vaginal microbiota remains unexplored in term primiparous women. A new sequencing technology, microbiome 2bRAD sequencing (2bRAD-M) that provides a higher level of species discrimination compared to amplicon sequencing. We applied 2bRAD-M to analyze the vaginal microbiota in a population with variations in cervical ripeness and to explore potential microbiota factors influencing cervical ripening. METHODS: A total of 30 full-term primigravid women participated in this study, with 15 belonging to the low scoring group of cervical ripeness and 15 to the high scoring group. Clinical information was collected from the participants, and the vaginal microbiota and community structure of both groups were analyzed using 2bRAD-M sequencing. Microbiota diversity and differential analyses were conducted to explore potential factors influencing cervical ripening. RESULTS: A total of 605 species were detected. There was no difference in vaginal microbiota diversity between the two groups, and the vaginal microbial composition was structurally similar. In the two groups, Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus iners were identified as the two pivotal species through random forest analysis. Concurrent, extensive and close connections between species within the two groups were observed in the correlation analysis, influencing the aforementioned two species. Pairwise comparisons showed that Sphingomonas (P = 0.0017) and three others were abundant in high scoring group, while Alloprevotella (P = 0.0014), Tannerella (P = 0.0033), Bacteroides (P = 0.0132), Malassezia (P = 0.0296), Catonella (P = 0.0353) and Pseudomonas (P = 0.0353) and so on showed higher abundance in low scoring group. Linear discriminant analysis effect size identified 29 discriminative feature taxa. CONCLUSION: For the first time, vaginal microbiota was sequenced using 2bRAD-M. With a relatively simple structure, a more stable vaginal microbiota is associated with higher cervical ripeness, and certain microorganisms, such as Sphingomonas, may play a beneficial role in cervical ripening.

Prenatal and postpartum depression may be influenced by the composition of host associated microbiomes. As such, the objective of this study was to elucidate the relationship between the human gut or vaginal microbiomes in pregnancy with prenatal or postpartum depression. METHODS: 140 female participants were recruited at their first prenatal visit and completed the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) to screen for depression and anxiety, in addition the EPDS was completed one month postpartum. Vaginal and stool biospecimens were collected in the third trimester, analyzed using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and assessed for alpha and beta diversity. Individual taxa differences and clustering using the k-medoids algorithm enabled community state type classification. RESULTS: Participants with higher postpartum EPDS scores had higher species richness and lower abundance of L. crispatus in the vaginal microbiota compared to those with lower EPDS scores. Participants with a higher prenatal EPDS score had lower species richness of the gut microbiome. Participants with a vaginal community state type dominated by L. iners had the highest mean prenatal EPDS scores, whereas postpartum EPDS scores were similar regardless of prenatal vaginal state type. LIMITATIONS: Our small sample size and participant's self-report bias limits generalizability of results. CONCLUSIONS: Depression in the prenatal and postpartum period is associated with the composition and diversity of the gut and vaginal microbiomes in the third trimester of pregnancy. These results provide a foundational understanding of the microbial relationships between maternal health and depression for identifying potential therapeutic treatments.

Low birth weight (LBW; <2,500 g) affects approximately 15 to 20 percent of global births annually and is associated with suboptimal child development. Recent studies suggest a link between the maternal gut microbiome and poor obstetric and perinatal outcomes. The goal of this study was to examine relationships between maternal microbial taxa, fecal metabolites, and maternal anthropometry on incidence of LBW in resource-limited settings. METHODS: This was a secondary analysis of the Women First trial conducted in a semi-rural region of Guatemala. Maternal weight was measured at 12 and 34 weeks (wk) of gestation. Infant anthropometry measures were collected within 48 h of delivery. Maternal fecal samples at 12 and 34 weeks were used for microbiome (16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing) and metabolomics analysis (34 wk). Linear mixed models using the MaAslin2 package were utilized to assess changes in microbiome associated with LBW. Predictive models using gradient boosted machines (XGBoost) were developed using the H2o.ai engine. RESULTS: No differences in β-diversity were observed at either time point between mothers with LBW infants relative to normal weight (NW) infants. Simpson diversity at 12 and 34 weeks was lower in mothers with LBW infants. Notable differences in genus-level abundance between LBW and NW mothers (p < 0.05) were observed at 12 weeks with increasing abundances of Barnesiella, Faecalibacterium, Sutterella, and Bacterioides. At 34 weeks, there were lower abundances of Magasphaera, Phascolarctobacterium, and Turicibacter and higher abundances of Bacteriodes, and Fusobacterium in mothers with LBW infants. Fecal metabolites related to bile acids, tryptophan metabolism and fatty acid related metabolites changed in mothers with LBW infants. Classification models to predict LBW based on maternal anthropometry and predicted microbial functions showed moderate performance. CONCLUSION: Collectively, the findings indicate that alterations in the maternal microbiome and metabolome were associated with LBW. Future research should target functional and predictive roles of the maternal gut microbiome in infant birth outcomes including birthweight.

Therefore, we conducted a study to investigate the alterations in fecal microbiome composition in wild type (WT) and Plin5-deficient (Plin5 -/-) mice models of MAFLD and MAFLD-induced HCC (MAFLD-HCC). We utilized 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis to profile the composition of gut bacteria in fecal samples. RESULTS: Notably, we discovered that the absence of Plin5 alone is already associated with changes in gut microbiota composition. Moreover, feeding the mice a Western diet (WD) resulted in additional microbial alterations. Interestingly, Plin5 -/- animals exhibited an enrichment of the beneficial taxa Lactobacillus in both animal models. DISCUSSION: Our findings identify Plin5 as a major regulator of gut microbiota during the development of MAFLD and MAFLD-HCC.

Oral, stool and, vaginal samples were self-collected at a single time point for healthy controls, and preoperatively for patients undergoing laparoscopy. Samples underwent 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, followed by bioinformatics analysis. MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Compositional differences between cohorts as identified by diversity analyses, and differentially abundant microbial taxa, as identified by LEfSE analysis. RESULTS: The composition of the oral (adjusted p = 0.003), and stool (adjusted p = 0.042) microbiota is different between the three cohorts. Differentially abundant taxa are present within each cohort as identified by LEfSE analysis. Particularly, Fusobacterium was enriched in the oral samples of patients with moderate/severe endometriosis. CONCLUSIONS: Taxonomic and compositional differences were found between the microbiota in the mouth, gut and, vagina of patients with and without endometriosis and healthy controls. Fusobacterium was enriched in patients with moderate/severe endometriosis. Fusobacterium is noted as a key pathogen in periodontal disease, a common comorbidity in endometriosis. These findings suggest a role for the oral, stool and, vaginal microbiome in endometriosis, and present potential for microbial-based treatments and the design of a diagnostic swab.

Maternal undernutrition is the most common cause of fetal growth restriction (FGR) worldwide. FGR increases morbidity and mortality during infancy, as well as contributes to adult-onset diseases including obesity and type 2 diabetes. The role of the maternal or offspring microbiome in growth outcomes following FGR is not well understood. METHODS: FGR was induced by 30% maternal calorie restriction (CR) during the second half of gestation in C57BL/6 mice. Pup weights were obtained on day of life 0, 1, and 7 and ages 3, 4 and 16 weeks. Fecal pellets were collected from pregnant dams at gestational day 18.5 and from offspring at ages 3 and 4 weeks of age. Bacterial genomic DNA was used for amplification of the V4 variable region of the 16S rRNA gene. Multivariable associations between maternal CR and taxonomic abundance were assessed using the MaAsLin2 package. Associations between microbial taxa and offspring outcomes were performed using distance-based redundancy analysis and Pearson correlations. RESULTS: FGR pups weighed about 20% less than controls. Beta but not alpha diversity differed between control and CR dam microbiomes. CR dams had lower relative abundance of Turicibacter, Flexispira, and Rikenella, and increased relative abundance of Parabacteroides and Prevotella. Control and FGR offspring microbiota differed by beta diversity at ages 3 and 4 weeks. At 3 weeks, FGR offspring had decreased relative abundance of Akkermansia and Sutterella and increased relative abundance of Anaerostipes and Paraprevotella. At 4 weeks, FGR animals had decreased relative abundance of Allobaculum, Sutterella, Bifidobacterium, and Lactobacillus, among others, and increased relative abundance of Turcibacter, Dorea, and Roseburia. Maternal Helicobacter abundance was positively associated with offspring weight. Akkermansia abundance at age 3 and 4 weeks was negatively associated with adult weight. CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate gut microbial dysbiosis in pregnant dams and offspring at two timepoints following maternal calorie restriction. Additional research is needed to test for functional roles of the microbiome in offspring growth outcomes.

Microbiome was profiled (16S rRNA sequencing) in feces from 196 children with CD. Sixty participants also provided samples after 18 months. Mural inflammation (Pediatric Inflammatory Crohn's Magnetic Resonance Enterography Index, PICMI), the simple endoscopic score for CD, and the weighted pediatric Crohn's disease activity index (wPCDAI) were assessed. Fecal calprotectin, plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), and fecal water content (FWC), a proxy of gastrointestinal transit time, were measured too. RESULTS: Microbiome α diversity, clustering, and differential taxa were related to disease status, but varied remarkably by disease activity measure used. The strongest relationships between microbiome and disease activity status were observed using wPCDAI; fewer or no relationships were seen using more objective measures like PICMI. Taxa predictive of disease activity status were dependent on the disease activity measure used with negligible overlap. Active disease was associated with more pathobionts (eg, Viellonella, Enterobacterales) and fewer fiber-fermenting organisms. The effect FWC had on microbiome superseded the effect of active disease for all disease activity measures, particularly with wPCDAI. Accounting for FWC, the differences in microbial signatures explained by disease activity status were attenuated or lost. CONCLUSIONS: In CD, microbiome signatures fluctuate depending on the measure used to assess disease severity; several of these signals might be secondary disease effects linked with changes in gut motility in active disease. PICMI appears to be less influenced when studying relationships between microbiome and mural inflammation in CD.

Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease, and its etiology is still unclear. There is increasing evidence suggesting that microorganisms may trigger psoriasis. However, the relationship between psoriasis and oral microbiota remains poorly understood. Our aim is to identify differences in the composition and diversity of the oral microbiota between patients with psoriasis and healthy controls, and to discover oral microbial markers for assessing the severity of psoriasis. METHODS: This study recruited 20 psoriasis patients and 20 healthy individuals, collecting their saliva to analyze the composition of the oral microbiota in psoriasis patients. We employed 16S rRNA sequencing technology and utilized various methods for oral microbiome analysis, including the Shannon Index, Gini-Simpson Index, Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA), non-metric multidimensional scaling (NMDS), Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size (LEfSe), Wilcoxon test, and Spearman's rank correlation. RESULTS: The results showed that the alpha diversity of oral microbiota was higher in psoriasis patients. The relative abundances of certain bacterial taxa differed between psoriasis and healthy individuals, including Prevotella, Prevotella 7 and Porphyromonas gingivalis, which are increased in psoriasis. We also found a positive correlation between Alloprevotella, Porphyromonas, and Neisseria with the severity of psoriasis, while Veillonella showed a negative correlation. CONCLUSION: In summary, this study found significant changes in the composition of the oral microbiota in patients with psoriasis. Some oral bacteria are associated with psoriasis severity. It provides a new perspective on the relationship between the oral microbiota and psoriasis.

We conducted a cross-sectional study with 24 participants, including patients with AA of varying severities and healthy controls. Scalp microbial communities were analyzed using swab samples and ion torrent sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene across multiple hypervariable regions. We explored correlations among bacterial abundance, microbiome metabolic pathways, and circulating inflammatory markers. RESULTS: Our findings reveal significant dysbiosis in the scalp microbiota of patients with AA compared to healthy controls. Severe AA cases had an increased presence of pro-inflammatory microbial taxa like Proteobacteria, whereas milder cases had higher levels of anti-inflammatory Actinobacteria. Notable species differences included abundant gram-negative bacteria such as Alistipes inops and Bacteroides pleibeius in severe AA, contrasted with Blautia faecis and Pyramydobacter piscolens predominantly in controls. Significantly, microbial imbalance correlated with AA severity (SALT scores) and systemic inflammatory markers, with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines linked to more severe disease. CONCLUSION: These results suggest that scalp microbiota may play a role in AA-related inflammation, although it is unclear whether the shifts are a cause or consequence of hair loss. Further research is needed to clarify the causal relationship and mechanisms involved.

The human gut microbiome produces and consumes a variety of compounds that interact with the host and impact health. Succinate is of particular interest as it intersects with both host and microbiome metabolism. However, which gut bacteria are most responsible for the consumption of intestinal succinate is poorly understood. RESULTS: We build upon an enrichment-based whole fecal sample culturing approach and identify two main bacterial taxa that are responsible for succinate consumption in the human intestinal microbiome, Phascolarctobacterium and Dialister. These two taxa have the hallmark of a functional guild and are strongly mutual exclusive across 21,459 fecal samples in 94 cohorts and can thus be used to assign a robust "succinotype" to an individual. We show that they differ with respect to their rate of succinate consumption in vitro and that this is associated with higher concentrations of fecal succinate. Finally, individuals suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more likely to have the Dialister succinotype compared to healthy subjects. CONCLUSIONS: We identified that only two bacterial genera are the key succinate consumers in human gut microbiome, despite the fact that many more intestinal bacteria encode for the succinate pathway. This highlights the importance of phenotypic assays in functionally profiling intestinal microbiota. A stratification based on "succinotype" is to our knowledge the first function-based classification of human intestinal microbiota. The association of succinotype with IBD thus builds a bridge between microbiome function and IBD pathophysiology related to succinate homeostasis. Video Abstract.

Early childhood caries (ECC) are a prevalent chronic disease in young children. However, there has been limited research on the microbiota in different tissue levels of the same tooth in children with ECC. This study aimed to investigate the dynamic changes in bacterial diversity during the progression of Severe Early Childhood Caries (S-ECC) within the same tooth, from the tooth surface to the root canal, by collecting tissue samples from different areas of the affected tooth. METHODS: Twenty primary teeth with periapical periodontitis were selected from 20 children aged 3-5 years, with 100 samples collected from the different layers: uncavitated buccal enamel surface without white spot lesion (surface), the outermost layer of the dentin carious lesion (superficial), the inner layer of carious dentin (deep), necrotic pulp tissue (pulp), and root exudate (exudate). The taxonomy of each OTU representative sequence was analyzed against the 16S rRNA database. Comparisons of alpha diversity between groups were performed. The number of shared and unique genera between groups counted. Beta diversity was contrasted to evaluate differences in bacterial community composition, and the relationships between the microbiota and samples were analyzed. The heatmap analysis of the 30 most abundant genera was used, which highlighted their relative distribution and abundance. The significantly abundant taxa (phylum to genera) of bacteria among the different groups were identified. The differences of relative abundance between bacterial genera among the five groups were analyzed. Significant Spearman correlations were noted, and visualization of the co-occurrence network was conducted. RESULTS: Bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing showed that most genera were present in all layers, with the number of shared genera increasing as the disease advanced. The bacterial communities and core genera in the co-occurrence network changed with progression to severe ECC. CONCLUSION: An increase in both the quantity and complexity of bacterial interactions was observed. This study emphasized the importance of paying attention to the relationship between microbial species rather than just checking changes in bacterial species structure when investigating the role of bacteria in disease progression.

Recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (CDI) is a critical clinical issue due to the increase in incidence and difficulty in treatment. We aimed to identify gut microbial and metabolic features associated with disease recurrence in a group of pediatric CDI patients. METHODS: A total of 84 children with primary CDI were prospectively enrolled in the study. Fecal samples collected at the initial diagnosis were subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing and targeted metabolomics analysis to profile the bacterial composition and metabolome. RESULTS: Twenty-six of 84 (31.0%) pediatric CDI patients experienced recurrence. The alpha diversity of the fecal microbiota was significantly lower in the recurrent group than in the nonrecurrent group, and the beta diversity was different from that of the nonrecurrent group. Taxonomic proﬁles revealed that the relative abundances of multiple bacterial taxa significantly differed between the recurrent and nonrecurrent groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size analysis identified several bacterial genera that discriminated between recurrent and nonrecurrent groups, including Parabacteroides, Coprococcus, Dialister, and Clostridium. Recurrent bacteria presented lower abundances of several short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria (Faecalibacterium, Butyricicoccus, Clostridium, Roseburia, and Ruminococcus), which were correlated with reduced fecal SCFA levels. In addition, several bile acids, including lithocholic acid (LCA), 12-ketoLCA, trihydroxycholestanoic acid, and deoxycholic acid, were decreased in recurrent patients. CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the differing gut microbiota profiles in pediatric CDI patients may contribute to disease recurrence by modulating SCFA concentrations and bile acid profiles. The gut microbiota and metabolite signatures may be used to predict disease recurrence in children with CDI.

The association of the oral microbiome with SARS-CoV-2 infections and disease progression has been documented in European, Asian, and American populations but not in Africa. METHODS: We conducted a study in Ghana to evaluate and compare the naso-oropharyngeal microbiome in SARS-CoV-2-infected and uninfected persons before (pre-vaccine) and after vaccine availability (post-vaccine) in the country. 16S rRNA V3-V4 variable region was sequenced and analysed from DNA extracted from naso-oropharyngeal swabs. RESULTS: Considering only the infection status, infected and uninfected groups had no difference in their within-group diversity and was evident in the study population pre- and post-vaccine availability. The introduction of vaccines reduced the diversity of the naso-oropharyngeal microbiome particularly among SARS-CoV-2 positive persons and, vaccinated individuals (both infected and uninfected) had higher microbial diversity compared to their unvaccinated counterparts. SARS-CoV-2-positive and -negative individuals were largely compositionally similar varying by 4-7% but considering vaccination*infection statuses, the genetic distance increased to 12% (P = 0.003) and was mainly influenced by vaccination. Common among the pre- and post-vaccine samples, Atopobium and Finegoldia were abundant in infected and uninfected individuals, respectively. Bacteria belonging to major butyrate-producing phyla, Bacillota (particularly class Clostridia) and Bacteroidota showed increased abundance more strikingly in infected individuals before vaccines were available. They reduced significantly after vaccines were introduced into the country with Fusobacterium and Lachnoanaerobaculum being the only common bacteria between pre-vaccine infected persons and vaccinated individuals, suggesting that natural infection and vaccination correlate with high abundance of short-chain fatty acids. CONCLUSION: Our results show, in an African cohort, the abundance of bacteria taxa known for their protective pathophysiological processes, especially during infection, suggesting that this population is protected against severe COVID-19. The immune-related roles of the members of Bacillota and Bacteroidota that were found associated with infection and vaccination require further studies, and how these may be linked to ethnicity, diet and age. We also recommend expansion of microbiome-disease association studies across Africa to identify possible bacterial-mediated therapeutics for emerging infections.

Endemic fluorosis refers to the condition when individuals are exposed to excessive amounts of fluoride ion due to living in a region characterized by elevated levels of fluorine in the drinking water, food, and/or air. In Pakistan, a substantial proportion of the population is thereby affected, posing a public health concern. OBJECTIVES: Assessing how the gut microbiota and its metabolic profiles are impacted by chronic exposure to fluoride in drinking water (that caused Dental Fluorosis) as well as to perceive how this microbiota is connected to adverse health outcomes prevailing with fluoride exposure. METHODS: Drinking water (n=27) and biological samples (n=100) of blood, urine and feces were collected from 70 high fluoride exposed (with Dental Fluorosis) and 30 healthy control (without Dental Fluorosis) subjects. Water and urinary fluoride concentrations were determined. Serum/plasma biochemical testing was performed. Fecal DNA extraction, 16S rRNA analysis of microbial taxa, their predicted metabolic function and fecal short chain fatty acids (SCFAs) quantification were carried out. RESULTS: The study revealed that microbiota taxonomic shifts and their metabolic characterization had been linked to certain host clinical parameters under the chronic fluoride exposure. Some sets of genera showed strong specificity to water and urine fluoride concentrations, Relative Fat Mass index and SCFAs. The SCFAs response in fluoride-exposed samples was observed to be correlated with bacterial taxa that could contribute to adverse health effects. CONCLUSIONS: Microbial dysbiosis as a result of endemic fluorosis exhibits a structure that is associated with risk of metabolic deregulation and is implicated in various diseases. Our results may form the development of novel interventions and may have utility in diagnosis and monitoring.

Individuals with non-celiac gluten/wheat sensitivity (NCGWS) experience improvement in gastrointestinal symptoms following a gluten-free diet. Although previous results have indicated that fructo-oligosaccharides (FOS), a type of short-chain fructans, were more likely to induce symptoms than gluten in self-reported NCGWS patients, the underlying mechanisms are unresolved. METHODS: Our main objective was therefore to investigate whether FOS-fructans and gluten affect the composition and diversity of the faecal microbiota (16S rRNA gene sequencing), faecal metabolites of microbial fermentation (short-chain fatty acids [SCFA]; gas chromatography with flame ionization detector), and a faecal biomarker of gut inflammation (neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, also known as lipocalin 2, NGAL/LCN2; ELISA). In the randomised double-blind placebo-controlled crossover study, 59 participants with self-reported NCGWS underwent three different 7-day diet challenges with gluten (5.7 g/day), FOS-fructans (2.1 g/day), and placebo separately (three periods, six challenge sequences). RESULTS: The relative abundances of certain bacterial taxa were affected differently by the diet challenges. After the FOS-fructan challenge, Fusicatenibacter increased, while Eubacterium (E.) coprostanoligenes group, Anaerotruncus, and unknown Ruminococcaceae genera decreased. The gluten challenge was primarily characterized by increased abundance of Eubacterium xylanophilum group. However, no differences were found for bacterial diversity (α-diversity), overall bacterial community structure (β-diversity), faecal metabolites (SCFA), or NGAL/LCN2. Furthermore, gastrointestinal symptoms in response to FOS-fructans were generally not linked to substantial shifts in the gut bacterial community. However, the reduction in E. coprostanoligenes group following the FOS-fructan challenge was associated with increased gastrointestinal pain. Finally, correlation analysis revealed that changes in gastrointestinal symptoms following the FOS-fructan and gluten challenges were linked to varying bacterial abundances at baseline. CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, while FOS-fructans induced more gastrointestinal symptoms than gluten in the NCGWS patients, we did not find that substantial shifts in the composition nor function of the faecal microbiota could explain these differences in the current study. However, our results indicate that individual variations in baseline bacterial composition/function may influence the gastrointestinal symptom response to both FOS-fructans and gluten. Additionally, the change in E. coprostanoligenes group, which was associated with increased symptoms, implies that attention should be given to these bacteria in future trials investigating the impact of dietary treatments on gastrointestinal symptoms. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov as NCT02464150.

Dietary intake has been suggested to be associated with the oral microbiome, but no study has examined the association between overall diet quality and the oral microbiome. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to investigate the cross-sectional association between the Healthy Eating Index-2020 (HEI-2020) and the diversity and composition of the oral microbiome among participants in the Buffalo Osteoporosis and Periodontal Disease (OsteoPerio) Study. METHODS: In 1175 postmenopausal women (mean age: 67 ± 7.0 y), we estimated the HEI-2020 scores for each woman from a food frequency questionnaire administered from 1997 to 2000. Bacterial DNA was extracted from subgingival plaque samples and analyzed using 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. The alpha-diversity (within-sample diversity) and β-diversity (between-sample diversity) across HEI-2020 quartiles were examined using analysis of covariance and permutational multivariate analysis of variance, respectively. The associations between the HEI-2020 score and the relative abundance of microbial taxa were examined by linear regression models. The analyses were further conducted for individual components of the HEI-2020. RESULTS: No statistically significant associations were observed between the HEI-2020 scores and alpha- or beta-diversity. However, greater consumption of seafood, plant proteins, and total protein and lower consumption of added sugars were positively associated with alpha-diversity. After we applied a false detection rate (FDR) correction, higher HEI-2020 scores were significantly associated with decreased abundance of Lautropia, Streptococcus gordonii, Cardiobacterium valvarum, and Cardiobacterium hominis, and increased abundance of Selenomonas sp. oral taxon 133 and Selenomonas dianae (FDR-adjusted P values < 0.10). Additionally, 28 other taxa were identified as being associated with HEI-2020 components. CONCLUSIONS: Although the HEI-2020 was associated with the composition, but not the diversity, of the oral microbiome, individual HEI-2020 components were associated with both its diversity and composition. Specific dietary components may have more impact on the diversity and composition of oral microbiome than overall diet quality assessed by the HEI-2020.

16 S rRNA gene amplicons from fecal samples from girls with precocious puberty and obesity-complicated precocious puberty and healthy children were sequenced to define microbial taxa. RESULTS: The α- and β-diversity indices of the microbiome significantly differed among the three groups. At the phylum level, the proportions of Firmicutes, Actinobacteriota, Bacteroidota, Bacteria, Campylobacterota, and Acidobacteriota were different. At the genus level, there were differences in Bifidobacterium, Bacteroides, Anaerostipes, Fusicatenibacter, Klebsiella, Lachnospiraceae, ErysipelotrichaceaeUCG-003, Prevotella9, Ruminococcus gnavus group, and Lachnoclostridium. Additionally, Bifidobacterium, Anaerostipes, Bacteroides, Candidatus Microthrix, Eubacterium hallii group, Klebsiella, and Erysipelotrichaceae UCG-003 were identified as bacterial biomarkers by LEfSe. Furthermore, Sellimonas, Intestinibacter, Anaerostipes, Ruminococcus gnavus group, and Oscillibacter were identified as the differential biomarkers by random forest. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was used to evaluate the biomarkers with high predictive value for obesity-related precocious puberty. Spearman correlation analysis confirmed that Anaerostipes levels were negatively correlated with body weight, body mass index (BMI), bone age, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and estradiol. CONCLUSIONS: There was a significant correlation between obesity-associated precocious puberty and gut microbiota, especially the functional characteristics of the microbiome and its interactions, which can provide a theoretical basis for the clinical intervention of obesity and precocious puberty through the microbiome.

Tuberculosis (TB), a major cause of disease and antimicrobial resistance, is spread via aerosols. Aerosols have diagnostic potential and airborne-microbes other than Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) may influence transmission. We evaluated whether PneumoniaCheck (PMC), a commercial aerosol collection device, captures MTBC and the aeromicrobiome of people with TB. METHODS: PMC was done in sputum culture-positive people (≥ 30 forced coughs each, n = 16) pre-treatment and PMC air reservoir (bag, corresponding to upper airways) and filter (lower airways) washes underwent Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra (Ultra) and 16S rRNA gene sequencing (sequencing also done on sputum). In a subset (n = 6), PMC microbiota (bag, filter) was compared to oral washes and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF). FINDINGS: 54% (7/13) bags and 46% (6/14) filters were Ultra-positive. Sequencing read counts and microbial diversity did not differ across bags, filters, and sputum. However, microbial composition in bags (Sphingobium-, Corynebacterium-, Novosphingobium-enriched) and filters (Mycobacterium-, Sphingobium-, Corynebacterium-enriched) each differed vs. sputum. Furthermore, sequencing only detected Mycobacterium in bags and filters but not sputum. In the subset, bag and filter microbial diversity did not differ vs. oral washes or BALF but microbial composition differed. Bags vs. BALF were Sphingobium-enriched and Mycobacterium-, Streptococcus-, and Anaerosinus-depleted (Anaerosinus also depleted in filters vs. BALF). Compared to BALF, none of the aerosol-enriched taxa were enriched in oral washes or sputum. INTERPRETATION: PMC captures aerosols with Ultra-detectable MTBC and MTBC is more detectable in aerosols than sputum by sequencing. The aeromicrobiome is distinct from sputum, oral washes and BALF and contains differentially-enriched lower respiratory tract microbes.

Airflow obstruction is a hallmark of disease severity and prognosis in bronchiectasis. The relationship between lung microbiota, airway inflammation, and outcomes in bronchiectasis with fixed airflow obstruction (FAO) remains unclear. This study explores these interactions in bronchiectasis patients, with and without FAO, and compares them to those diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). METHODS: This prospective observational study in Taiwan enrolled patients with either bronchiectasis or COPD. To analyze the lung microbiome and assess inflammatory markers, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples were collected for 16S rRNA gene sequencing. The study cohort comprised 181 patients: 86 with COPD, 46 with bronchiectasis, and 49 with bronchiectasis and FAO, as confirmed by spirometry. RESULTS: Patients with bronchiectasis, with or without FAO, had similar microbiome profiles characterized by reduced alpha diversity and a predominance of Proteobacteria, distinctly different from COPD patients who exhibited more Firmicutes, greater diversity, and more commensal taxa. Furthermore, compared to COPD and bronchiectasis without FAO, bronchiectasis with FAO showed more severe disease and a higher risk of exacerbations. A significant correlation was found between the presence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and increased airway neutrophilic inflammation such as Interleukin [IL]-1β, IL-8, and tumor necrosis factor-alpha [TNF]-α, as well as with higher bronchiectasis severity, which might contribute to an increased risk of exacerbations. Moreover, in bronchiectasis patients with FAO, the ROSE (Radiology, Obstruction, Symptoms, and Exposure) criteria were employed to classify individuals as either ROSE (+) or ROSE (-), based on smoking history. This classification highlighted differences in clinical features, inflammatory profiles, and slight microbiome variations between ROSE (-) and ROSE (+) patients, suggesting diverse endotypes within the bronchiectasis with FAO group. CONCLUSION: Bronchiectasis patients with FAO may exhibit two distinct endotypes, as defined by ROSE criteria, characterized by greater disease severity and a lung microbiome more similar to bronchiectasis without FAO than to COPD. The significant correlation between Pseudomonas aeruginosa colonization and increased airway neutrophilic inflammation, as well as disease severity, underscores the clinical relevance of microbial patterns. This finding reinforces the potential role of these patterns in the progression and exacerbations of bronchiectasis with FAO.

Sows were evaluated for POP risk using an established perineal scoring system, with a perineal score (PS) of 1 (PS1) presuming little to no risk of POP to a PS of 3 (PS3) presuming high risk of POP. In the current study, 2,864 sows were scored during gestation week 15, and 1.0%, 2.7%, and 23.4% of PS1, PS2, and PS3 sows, respectively, subsequently experienced POP. Fecal swabs (n = 215) were collected between gestation days 108-115, DNA was extracted, and 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing libraries were analyzed using mothur, phyloseq and SAS in reference to PS and POP outcome. Additionally, co-occurrence networks were constructed using CoNet to compare fecal and vaginal microbiota from the same cohort of sows and identify correlations between different taxa. RESULTS: Differences in fecal community composition (PERMANOVA; P < 0.05), structure (alpha diversity measurements; P < 0.05), and 13 individual operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were revealed between PS1 and PS3 assigned sows. No differences in fecal microbiota were detected as a result of POP outcome. However, the abundances of several taxa were correlated across sample collection sites, suggesting the fecal and vaginal microbial communities may be related to one another. DISCUSSION: Collectively, fewer differences in the fecal microbiota exist in sows with differing risk for POP compared to the vaginal microbiota, suggesting the vaginal microbiome may be more relevant in relation to POP outcome, although correlations between fecal and vaginal communities may provide insight for strategies to combat POP.

Understanding the relationship between resident microbiota and disease in cultured fish represents an important and emerging area of study. Marine gill disorders in particular are considered an important challenge to Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) aquaculture, however relatively little is known regarding the role resident gill microbiota might play in providing protection from or potentiating different gill diseases. Here, 16S rRNA sequencing was used to examine the gill microbiome alongside fish health screening in farmed Atlantic salmon. Results were used to explore the relationship between microbial communities and gill disease. RESULTS: Microbial community restructuring was observed throughout the sampling period and linked to varied drivers of change, including environmental conditions and severity of gill pathology. Taxa with significantly greater relative abundance on healthier gills included isolates within genus Shewanella, and taxa within family Procabacteriaceae. In contrast, altered abundance of Candidatus Branchiomonas and Rubritalea spp. were associated with damaged gills. Interestingly, more general changes in community richness and diversity were not associated with altered gill health, and thus not apparently deleterious to fish. Gross and histological gill scoring demonstrated seasonal shifts in gill pathology, with increased severity of gill damage in autumn. Specific infectious causes that contributed to observed pathology within the population included the gill disorder amoebic gill disease (AGD), however due to the uncontrolled nature of this study and likely mixed contribution of various causes of gill disease to observed pathology results do not strongly support an association between the microbial community and specific infectious or non-infectious drivers of gill pathology. CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that the microbial community of farmed Atlantic salmon gills undergo continual restructuring in the marine environment, with mixed influences upon this change including environmental, host, and pathogenic factors. A significant association of specific taxa with different gill health states suggests these taxa might make meaningful indicators of gill health. Further research with more frequent sampling and deliberate manipulation of gills would provide important advancement of knowledge in this area. Overall, although much is still to be learnt regarding what constitutes a healthy or maladapted gill microbial community, the results of this study provide clear advancement of the field, providing new insight into the microbial community structure of gills during an annual production cycle of marine-stage farmed Atlantic salmon.

Previous studies have identified a diverse group of microbial taxa that differ between patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) and the healthy population. However, interpreting findings on MS-associated microbiota is challenging, as there is no true consensus. It is unclear whether there is gut microbiota commonly altered in MS across studies. METHODS: To answer this, we performed a meta-analysis based on the 16S rRNA gene sequencing data from seven geographically and technically diverse studies comprising a total of 524 adult subjects (257 MS and 267 healthy controls). Analysis was conducted for each individual study after reprocessing the data and also by combining all data together. The blocked Wilcoxon rank-sum test and linear mixed-effects regression were used to identify differences in microbial composition and diversity between MS and healthy controls. Network analysis was conducted to identify bacterial correlations. A leave-one-out sensitivity analysis was performed to ensure the robustness of the findings. RESULTS: The microbiome community structure was significantly different between studies. Re-analysis of data from individual studies revealed a lower relative abundance of Prevotella in MS across studies, compared to controls. Meta-analysis found that although alpha and beta diversity did not differ between MS and controls, a higher abundance of Actinomyces and a lower abundance of Faecalibacterium were reproducibly associated with MS. Additionally, network analysis revealed that the recognized negative Bacteroides-Prevotella correlation in controls was disrupted in patients with MS. CONCLUSIONS: Our meta-analysis identified common gut microbiota associated with MS across geographically and technically diverse studies.

Recently, there has been an increase in the number of studies focusing on the association between the gut microbiome and obesity or inflammatory diseases, especially in adults. However, there is a lack of studies investigating the association between gut microbiome and gastrointestinal (GI) diseases in adolescents. METHOD: We obtained 16S rRNA-seq datasets for gut microbiome analysis from 202 adolescents, comprising ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease (CD), obesity (Ob), and healthy controls (HC). We utilized Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) and Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) to acquire Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs). Subsequently, we analyzed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Orthology (KO) terms and pathway enrichment for the identified OTUs. RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the difference between the gut microbiomes in adolescents with GI diseases and those in healthy adolescents using 202 samples of 16S rRNA sequencing data. The distribution of the six main gut microbiota (i.e., unclassified Dorea, unclassified Lachnospiraceae, unclassified Ruminococcus, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella copri, unclassified Sutterella) was different based on the status of obesity and inflammatory diseases. Dysbiosis was observed within Lachnospiraceae in adolescents with inflammatory diseases (i.e., UC and CD), and in adolescents with obesity within Prevotella and Sutterella. More specifically, our results showed that the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and unclassified Lachnospiraceae was more than 10% and 8% higher, respectively, in the UC group compared to the CD, Ob, and HC groups. Additionally, the Ob group had over 20% and over 3% higher levels of Prevotella copri and unclassified Sutterella, respectively, compared to the UC, CD, and HC groups. Also, inspecting associations between the six specific microbiota and KO terms, we found that the six microbiota -relating KO terms were associated with NOD-like receptor signaling. These six taxa differences may affect the immune system and inflammatory response by affecting NOD-like receptor signaling in the host during critical adolescence. CONCLUSION: In this study, we discovered that dysbiosis of the microbial community had varying degrees of influence on the inflammatory and immune response pathways in adolescents with inflammatory diseases and obesity.

Gut microbiota may influence the development of acute pancreatitis (AP), a serious gastrointestinal disease with high morbidity and mortality. This study aimed to identify a causal link by investigating the relationship between gut microbiota and AP. METHODS: Mendelian randomization (MR) and a nested case-control study were used to explore associations between gut microbiota composition and AP. 16S rRNA sequencing, random forest modelling (RF), support vector machine (SVM), and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was applied to identify significant gut microbiota and their correlation with hospitalization duration in AP patients. RESULTS: Bidirectional MR results confirmed a causal link between specific gut microbiota and AP (15 and 8 microbial taxa identified via forward and reverse MR, respectively). The 16S rRNA sequencing analysis demonstrated a pronounced difference in gut microbiota composition between cases and controls. Notably, after a comprehensive evaluation of the results of RF and SVM, Bacteroides plebeius (B. plebeius) was found to play a significant role in influencing the hospital status. Using a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, the predictive power (0.757) of B. plebeius. Kaplan-Meier survival analysis offered further insight that patients with an elevated abundance of B. plebeius experienced prolonged hospital stays. CONCLUSION: Combining MR with nested case-control studies provided a detailed characterization of interactions between gut microbiota and AP. B. plebeius was identified as a significant contributor, suggesting its role as both a precursor and consequence of AP dynamics. The findings highlight the multifactorial nature of AP and its complex relationship with the gut microbiota. This study lays the groundwork for future therapeutic interventions targeting microbial dynamics in AP treatment.

For this purpose, 6 pig farms were environmentally sampled. Farms were affiliated with a production company that handle the majority of the pigs slaughtered in Spain. This study investigated the relationship among high health and low health status farms using high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing. In addition, to identify ecologically relevant functions and potential pathogens based on the 16S rRNA gene sequences obtained, functional Annotation with PROkaryotic TAXa (FAPROTAX) was performed. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: This study reveals notable differences in microbial communities between farms with persistent health issues and those with good health outcomes, suggesting a need for protocols tailored to address specific challenges. The variation in microbial populations among farms underscores the need for specific and eco-friendly cleaning and disinfection protocols. These measures are key to enhancing the sustainability of livestock farming, ensuring safer products and boosting competitive edge in the market.

Rat fecal samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing technology. Bioinformatic and correlation analyses were performed on microbiota data to determine significant associations. SRL substantially attenuated the adverse effects exerted by PF on the structure and diversity of gut microbiota while regulating its alpha and beta diversities. Linear discriminant analysis effect size enabled the identification of 62 differentially abundant microbial taxa. Gut microbiota abundance analysis revealed that SRL significantly increased the relative abundance of bacterial phyla such as Firmicutes and Bacteroidetes. Moreover, SRL increased the proportion of beneficial bacteria, such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteriales, decreased the proportion of pathogenic bacteria, such as Rikenellaceae, and balanced the gut microbiota by regulating metabolic pathways. CONCLUSIONS: SRL may attenuate PF by regulating gut microbiota. This exploratory study establishes the groundwork for investigating the metagenomics of PF.

Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) is an effective treatment for active Crohn's disease (CD). This study explored the immunostimulatory potential of a cell-free fecal filtrate and related this with changes in the fecal microbiota and metabolites in children with active CD undertaking treatment with EEN. METHODS: Production of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was measured following their stimulation with cell-free fecal slurries from children with CD, before, during, and at completion of EEN. The metabolomic profile of the feces used was quantified using proton nuclear magnetic resonance and their microbiota composition with 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing. RESULTS: Following treatment with EEN, 8 (72%) of 11 patients demonstrated a reduction in fecal calprotectin (FC) >50% and were subsequently labeled FC responders. In this subgroup, TNFα production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was reduced during EEN (P = .008) and reached levels like healthy control subjects. In parallel to these changes, the fecal concentrations of acetate, butyrate, propionate, choline, and uracil significantly decreased in FC responders, and p-cresol significantly increased. At EEN completion, TNFα production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was positively correlated with butyrate (rho = 0.70; P = .016). Microbiota structure (β diversity) was influenced by EEN treatment, and a total of 28 microbial taxa changed significantly in fecal calprotectin responders. At EEN completion, TNFα production positively correlated with the abundance of fiber fermenters from Lachnospiraceae_UCG-004 and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and negatively with Hungatella and Eisenbergiella tayi. CONCLUSIONS: This study offers proof-of concept data to suggest that the efficacy of EEN may result from modulation of diet-dependent microbes and their products that cause inflammation in patients with CD.

We prospectively enrolled GERD patients with normal endoscopy and evaluated esophageal motility and contraction reserve with multiple rapid swallows during high-resolution manometry. The esophageal mucosa was biopsied for DNA extraction and 16S ribosomal RNA gene V3-V4 (Illumina)/full-length (Pacbio) amplicon sequencing analysis. RESULTS: Among the 56 recruited patients, 20 had normal motility (NM), 19 had IEM with contraction reserve (IEM-R), and 17 had IEM without contraction reserve (IEM-NR). Esophageal microbiome analysis showed a significant decrease in microbial richness in patients with IEM-NR when compared to NM. The beta diversity revealed different microbiome profiles between patients with NM or IEM-R and IEM-NR (P = 0.037). Several esophageal bacterial taxa were characteristic in patients with IEM-NR, including reduced Prevotella spp. and Veillonella dispar, and enriched Fusobacterium nucleatum. In a microbiome-based random forest model for predicting IEM-NR, an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve of 0.81 was yielded. CONCLUSIONS: In symptomatic GERD patients with normal endoscopic findings, the esophageal microbiome differs based on contraction reserve among IEM. Absent contraction reserve appears to alter the physiology and microbiota of the esophagus.

High-fat diets cause gut dysbiosis and promote triglyceride accumulation, obesity, gut permeability changes, inflammation, and insulin resistance. Both cocoa butter and fish oil are considered to be a part of healthy diets. However, their differential effects on gut microbiome perturbations in mice fed high concentrations of these fats, in the absence of sucrose, remains to be elucidated. The aim of the study was to test whether the sucrose-free cocoa butter-based high-fat diet (C-HFD) feeding in mice leads to gut dysbiosis that associates with a pathologic phenotype marked by hepatic steatosis, low-grade inflammation, perturbed glucose homeostasis, and insulin resistance, compared with control mice fed the fish oil based high-fat diet (F-HFD). RESULTS: C57BL/6 mice (5-6 mice/group) were fed two types of high fat diets (C-HFD and F-HFD) for 24 weeks. No significant difference was found in the liver weight or total body weight between the two groups. The 16S rRNA sequencing of gut bacterial samples displayed gut dysbiosis in C-HFD group, with differentially-altered microbial diversity or relative abundances. Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, and Proteobacteria were highly abundant in C-HFD group, while the Verrucomicrobia, Saccharibacteria (TM7), Actinobacteria, and Tenericutes were more abundant in F-HFD group. Other taxa in C-HFD group included the Bacteroides, Odoribacter, Sutterella, Firmicutes bacterium (AF12), Anaeroplasma, Roseburia, and Parabacteroides distasonis. An increased Firmicutes/Bacteroidetes (F/B) ratio in C-HFD group, compared with F-HFD group, indicated the gut dysbiosis. These gut bacterial changes in C-HFD group had predicted associations with fatty liver disease and with lipogenic, inflammatory, glucose metabolic, and insulin signaling pathways. Consistent with its microbiome shift, the C-HFD group showed hepatic inflammation and steatosis, high fasting blood glucose, insulin resistance, increased hepatic de novo lipogenesis (Acetyl CoA carboxylases 1 (Acaca), Fatty acid synthase (Fasn), Stearoyl-CoA desaturase-1 (Scd1), Elongation of long-chain fatty acids family member 6 (Elovl6), Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma (Pparg) and cholesterol synthesis (β-(hydroxy β-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (Hmgcr). Non-significant differences were observed regarding fatty acid uptake (Cluster of differentiation 36 (CD36), Fatty acid binding protein-1 (Fabp1) and efflux (ATP-binding cassette G1 (Abcg1), Microsomal TG transfer protein (Mttp) in C-HFD group, compared with F-HFD group. The C-HFD group also displayed increased gene expression of inflammatory markers including Tumor necrosis factor alpha (Tnfa), C-C motif chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2), and Interleukin-12 (Il12), as well as a tendency for liver fibrosis. CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the sucrose-free C-HFD feeding in mice induces gut dysbiosis which associates with liver inflammation, steatosis, glucose intolerance and insulin resistance.

Fecal microbiome data were collected from 30 AS patients before and after secukinumab therapy and compared with data from 40 healthy controls (HC). Additionally, we analyzed the metabolic profile of both groups from plasma. RESULTS: Findings indicated that the treatment-induced changes in the composition of several crucial bacterial groups, including Megamonas, Prevotella_9, Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, Bacteroides, and Agathobacter. Post-treatment, these groups exhibited a distribution more akin to that of the healthy populations compared with their pretreatment status. We identified three gut microbial taxa, namely Prevotellaceae_bacterium_Marseille_P2831, Prevotella_buccae, and Elusimicrobiota, as potential biomarkers for diagnosing individuals at a higher risk of developing AS and assessing disease outcomes. Plasma metabolomics analysis revealed 479 distinct metabolites and highlighted three disrupted metabolic pathways. Integration of microbiome and metabolomics datasets demonstrated a significant degree of correlation, underscoring the impact of the microbiome on metabolic activity. CONCLUSION: Secukinumab can restore the balance of the gut microbiome and metabolites in AS patients, rendering them more similar to those found in the healthy population. The analysis of microbiome and metabolomics data have unveiled some candidate biomarkers capable of evaluating treatment efficacy.

Past findings demonstrate that arthropods can egest midgut microbiota into the host skin leading to dual colonization of the vertebrate host with pathogens and saliva microbiome. A knowledge gap exists on how the saliva microbiome interacts with the pathogen in the saliva. To fill this gap, we need to first define the microbial composition of mosquito saliva. METHODS: The current study aimed at analyzing and comparing the microbial profile of Aedes albopictus saliva and midgut as well as assessing the impact of Zika virus (ZIKV) infection on the midgut and saliva microbial composition. Colony-reared Ae. albopictus strains were either exposed to ZIKV infectious or noninfectious bloodmeal. At 14 ays postinfection, the 16S V3-V4 hypervariable rRNA region was amplified from midgut and saliva samples and sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq platform. The relative abundance and diversity of midgut and saliva microbial taxa were assessed. RESULTS: We observed a richer microbial community in the saliva compared with the midgut, yet some of the microbial taxa were common in the midgut and saliva. ZIKV infection did not impact the microbial diversity of midgut or saliva. Further, we identified Elizabethkingia spp. in the Ae. albopictus saliva. CONCLUSIONS: This study provides insights into the microbial community of the Ae. albopictus saliva as well as the influence of ZIKV infection on the microbial composition of its midgut and saliva. The identification of Elizabethkingia spp., an emerging pathogen of global health significance, in Ae. albopictus saliva is of medical importance. Future studies to assess the interactions between Ae. albopictus saliva microbiome and ZIKV could lead to novel strategies for developing transmission barrier tools.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from complex interactions between host and environment, which include the gut and tissue microbiome. It is hypothesized that epigenetic regulation by gut microbiota is a fundamental interface by which commensal microbes dynamically influence intestinal biology. The aim of this study is to explore the interplay between gut and tissue microbiota and host DNA methylation in CRC. METHODS: Metagenomic sequencing of fecal samples was performed on matched CRC patients (n = 18) and healthy controls (n = 18). Additionally, tissue microbiome was profiled with 16S rRNA gene sequencing on tumor (n = 24) and tumor-adjacent normal (n = 24) tissues of CRC patients, while host DNA methylation was assessed through whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) in a subset of 13 individuals. RESULTS: Our analysis revealed substantial alterations in the DNA methylome of CRC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues. An extensive meta-analysis, incorporating publicly available and in-house data, identified significant shifts in microbial-derived methyl donor-related pathways between tumor and adjacent normal tissues. Of note, we observed a pronounced enrichment of microbial-associated CpGs within the promoter regions of genes in adjacent normal tissues, a phenomenon notably absent in tumor tissues. Furthermore, we established consistent and recurring associations between methylation patterns of tumor-related genes and specific bacterial taxa. CONCLUSIONS: This study emphasizes the pivotal role of the gut microbiota and pathogenic bacteria in dynamically shaping DNA methylation patterns, impacting physiological homeostasis, and contributing to CRC tumorigenesis. These findings provide valuable insights into the intricate host-environment interactions in CRC development and offer potential avenues for therapeutic interventions in this disease.

Chronic endometritis (CE) is associated with poor reproductive outcomes, yet the role of endometrial microbiota in patients with recurrent implantation failure (RIF) and CE remains unclear. This study aims to characterize endometrial microbiota in RIF patients with CE and assess its implications for reproductive outcomes. METHODS: In this prospective study, we enrolled RIF patients both with and without CE. Endometrial and cervical samples were collected for 16 S rRNA gene sequencing. Microbiota composition was compared between groups using diversity indices, phylum, and genus-level analysis. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) and Spearman's correlation coefficients were used to assess relationships between CE, reproductive outcomes, and microbiota. Predictive functional profiling was performed to evaluate metabolic pathways associated with CE. RESULTS: Endometrial microbiota in CE patients exhibited greater diversity and evenness compared to non-CE patients. Principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) revealed distinct clustering between CE and non-CE groups. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) identified Proteobacteria, Aminicenantales, and Chloroflexaceae as characteristic of CE, while Lactobacillus, Acinetobacter, Herbaspirillum, Ralstonia, Shewanela, and Micrococcaceae were associated with non-CE. CCA demonstrated associations between CE, adverse reproductive outcomes, and specific bacterial taxa. Microbial metabolic pathways significantly differed between CE and non-CE groups, with enrichment in pathways related to cofactors, vitamins, secondary metabolites, and the immune system in CE patients. CONCLUSION: RIF patients with CE exhibit distinct endometrial microbiota compositions associated with adverse reproductive outcomes. The increased microbial diversity and altered metabolic pathways in CE suggest a potential correlation with reproductive outcomes, although further studies are necessary to elucidate the causal relationship between microbiota alterations and fertility. Modulating the endometrial microbiome may represent a novel therapeutic strategy to improve IVF outcomes in patients with CE.

The salivary microbiome may interact with chemoradiotherapy through dynamic changes in microbial composition and systemic immunity. We aimed to explore the association between the salivary microbiome and response to chemoradiotherapy in initially inoperable patients with local advanced esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (LAESCC). METHODS: Salivary and peripheral blood samples were collected before and after chemoradiotherapy. The microbiome and metabolic pathways were analyzed by 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry/Mass spectrometry analyses. RESULTS: The salivary microbiome exhibited characteristic variations between patients and healthy controls. A significant correlation was found between Prevotella_salivae, Saccharibacteria_TM7_G3_bacterium_HMT_351, and Veillonellaceae_G1_bacterium_HMT_129 and pathological complete response (pCR) in initially inoperable patients who underwent surgery. The PICRUSt suggested that immune diseases and cell motility were different in tumor compared to normal groups. KEGG enrichment analysis showed enriched lipid metabolism, signal transduction, and membrane transport in the tumor group. CD3+CD8 T cells, IL6, IL10, and IFNγ exhibited an increasing trend during the treatment process of chemoradiotherapy. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrated that variations in specific saliva taxa associated with host immunomodulatory cells and cytokines could be promising for early efficacy prediction of chemoradiotherapy in initially inoperable patients with LAESCC.

The influence of the microbiota on hypoglycemic agents is becoming more apparent. The effects of metformin, a primary anti-diabetes drug, on gut microbiota are still not fully understood. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: This prospective cohort study aims to investigate the longitudinal effects of metformin on the gut microbiota of 25 treatment-naïve diabetes patients, each receiving a daily dose of 1500 mg. Microbiota compositions were analyzed at baseline, and at 1, 3, and 6 months of medication using 16S rRNA gene sequencing. RESULTS: Prior to the 3-month period of metformin treatment, significant improvements were noted in body mass index (BMI) and glycemic-related parameters, such as fasting blood glucose (FPG) and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), alongside homeostasis model assessment indices of insulin resistance (HOMA-IR). At the 3-month mark of medication, a significant reduction in the α-diversity of the gut microbiota was noted, while β-diversity exhibited no marked variances throughout the treatment duration. The Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes ratio. markedly decreased. Metformin treatment consistently increased Escherichia-Shigella and decreased Romboutsia, while Pseudomonas decreased at 3 months. Fuzzy c-means clustering identified three longitudinal trajectory clusters for microbial fluctuations: (i) genera temporarily changing, (ii) genera continuing to decrease (Bacteroides), and (iii) genera continuing to increase(Lachnospiraceae ND3007 group, [Eubacterium] xylanophilum group, Romboutsia, Faecalibacterium and Ruminococcaceae UCG-014). The correlation matrix revealed associations between specific fecal taxa and metformin-related clinical parameters HbA1c, FPG, Uric Acid (UA), high-density lipoproteincholesterol (HDL-C), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), hypersensitive C-reactive protein (hs-CRP), triglyceride (TG) (P < 0.05). Metacyc database showed that metformin significantly altered 17 functional pathways. Amino acid metabolism pathways such as isoleucine biosynthesis predominated in the post-treatment group. CONCLUSIONS: Metformin's role in glucose metabolism regulation may primarily involve specific alterations in certain gut microbial species rather than an overall increase in microbial species diversity. This may suggest gut microbiota targets in future studies on metabolic abnormalities caused by metformin.

We evaluated whether the sputum bacterial microbiome differs between nontuberculous mycobacteria pulmonary disease (NTM-PD) patients with stable disease not requiring antibiotic treatment and those requiring antibiotics. METHODS: We collected sputum samples from 21 clinically stable NTM-PD patients (stable group) and 14 NTM-PD patients needing antibiotic treatment (treatment group). We also obtained 13 follow-up samples from the stable group. We analyzed the 48 samples using 16S rRNA gene sequencing (V3-V4 region) and compared the groups. RESULTS: In the linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis, the species Porphyromonas pasteri, Haemophilus parahaemolyticus, Prevotella nanceiensis, and Gemella haemolysans were significantly more prevalent in the sputum of the stable group compared to the treatment group. No taxa showed significant differences in alpha-/beta-diversity or LEfSe between the 21 baseline and 13 follow-up sputum samples in the stable group. In the stable group, the genus Bergeyella and species Prevotella oris were less common in patients who achieved spontaneous culture conversion (n = 9) compared to those with persistent NTM positivity (n = 12) (effect size 3.04, p = 0.039 for Bergeyella; effect size 3.64, p = 0.033 for P. oris). In the treatment group, H. parainfluenzae was more common in patients with treatment success (n = 7) than in treatment-refractory patients (n = 7) (effect size 4.74, p = 0.013). CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified distinct bacterial taxa in the sputum of NTM-PD patients based on disease status. These results suggest the presence of a microbial environment that helps maintain disease stability.

We conducted 16S rDNA sequencing on saliva and subgingival plaque from 109 PKU patients (ages 6-68 years) and 114 age-matched controls and correlated oral microbial composition and dental health. RESULTS: PKU patients exhibited worse dental health, reduced oral microbial diversity and a difference in the abundance of specific taxa, especially Actinobacteriota species, compared to controls. PKU patients with poor periodontal health exhibited higher alpha diversity than the orally healthy ones, marked by high abundance of the genus Tannerella. Notably, the observed taxonomic differences in PKU patients with normal indices of decayed/missing/filled teeth, plaque control record, gingival bleeding index and periodontal screening and recording index generally differed from microbial signatures of periodontitis. CONCLUSIONS: PKU patients' reduced microbial diversity may be due to their diet's metabolic challenges disrupting microbial and immune balance, thus increasing oral inflammation. Higher alpha diversity in PKU patients with oral inflammation is likely related to expanded microbial niches.

The substantial risk for respiratory and invasive infections with Streptococcus pneumoniae (Spn) among people with HIV-1 (PWH) begins with asymptomatic colonization. The frequency of Spn colonization among U.S. adults with and without HIV-1 infection is not well-characterized in the conjugate vaccine era. METHODS: We determined Spn colonization frequency by culture and specific lytA gene QPCR and microbiota profile by 16S rRNA gene sequencing in nasopharyngeal (NP) and oropharyngeal (OP) DNA from 138 PWH and 93 control adults and associated clinical characteristics. RESULTS: The frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls did not differ (11.6% vs 8.6%, respectively; p=0.46) using combined results of culture and PCR, independent of vaccination or behavioral risks. PWH showed altered microbiota composition (i.e., beta-diversity. NP: p=0.0028, OP: p=0.0098), decreased alpha-diversity (NP: p=0.024, OP: p=0.0045), and differences in the relative abundance of multiple bacterial taxa. Spn colonization was associated with altered beta-diversity in the NP (p=0.011), but not OP (p=0.21). CONCLUSIONS: Despite widespread conjugate vaccine and antiretroviral use, frequencies of Spn colonization among PWH and controls are currently consistent with those reported in the pre-conjugate era. The persistently increased risk of pneumococcal disease despite ART may relate to behavioral and immunologic variables other than colonization.

The microbiome likely plays a role in tuberculosis (TB) pathogenesis. We evaluated the site-of-disease microbiome and predicted metagenome in people with presumptive tuberculous pericarditis, a major cause of mortality, and explored for the first time, the interaction between its association with C-reactive protein (CRP), a potential diagnostic biomarker and the site-of-disease microbiome in extrapulmonary TB. METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) provided background sampling controls and pericardial fluid (PF) for 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysed using QIIME2 and PICRUSt2. Blood was collected to measure CRP. RESULTS: PF from people with definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous pericarditis differed in β-diversity. dTBs were, vs. nTBs, Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria- enriched. Within dTBs, HIV-positives were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium- , Methylobacterium- , and Leptothrix -enriched vs. HIV-negatives and HIV-positive dTBs on ART were Mycobacterium - and Bifidobacterium -depleted vs. those not on ART. Compared to nTBs, dTBs exhibited short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and mycobacterial metabolism microbial pathway enrichment. People with additional non-pericardial involvement had differentially PF taxa (e.g., Mycobacterium -enrichment and Streptococcus -depletion associated with pulmonary infiltrates). Mycobacterium reads were in 34% (31/91), 8% (2/25) and 17% (4/23) of dTBs, pTBs, and nTBs, respectively. β-diversity differed between patients with CRP above vs. below the median value ( Pseudomonas -depleted). There was no correlation between enriched taxa in dTBs and CRP. CONCLUSIONS: PF is compositionally distinct based on TB status, HIV (and ART) status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The clinical significance of these findings, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires evaluation.

The extensive use of antibiotics in the global livestock industry in recent decades has accelerated the accumulation and dissemination of antibiotic-resistance genes (ARGs) within terrestrial ecosystems. This occurs due to the limited absorption of most antibiotics, leading to their release into the environment through feces and urine. This poses a significant threat to both the environment and human health. However, the response of antibiotic-resistant microorganisms and their ARGs in grasslands to prolonged grazing, as well as the primary microbial taxa driving the ARG distribution, remain poorly understood, especially within various microhabitats. In this study, we characterized ARGs in the phyllosphere, litter, and soil after decades of livestock grazing in a meadow steppe. We particularly focused on identifying the major members of the microbial community influencing ARGs and the distinction between microbial generalists and specialists. RESULTS: Our findings indicate that a core set of ARGs accounted for 90% of the abundance in this plant-soil ecosystem. While the soil exhibited the highest ARG abundance, the phyllosphere, and litter displayed higher ARG diversity and diverse distribution patterns after overgrazing. Grazing increased ARG abundance by elevating the proportion of core ARGs and suppressing stochastic ARGs in the phyllosphere and litter, while it had little effect on the ARGs in the soil. Additionally, microbial generalist abundance increased, but specialist abundance decreased in the phyllosphere and litter, with no effect in the soil, under grazed conditions. Ultimately, microbial microhabitats and grazing influenced ARG community characteristics through direct (i.e., feces and other exogenous ARG input) and indirect (i.e., trampling and selective feeding) effects on nutrient availability, microbial community composition, and mobile genetic elements. The generalist community, with its broad ecological niches and phylogenetic composition, made the most significant contribution to the ARG characteristics. CONCLUSIONS: This study underscores the impact of environmental disturbances on the distributional patterns of ARGs in ecosystems, mediated by the regulation of microbial generalized species. These insights enhance our understanding of microbial control over ARGs and facilitate predictions regarding the dynamics and risk of ARGs in diverse ecological niches subjected to anthropogenic disturbances. Video Abstract.

Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa (Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as antibiotic use.

The maternal gut microbiome is the direct and important source of early colonization and development of the neonatal gut microbiome. However, differences in unique and shared features between mothers with different physiological phenotypes and their newborns still lack exhaustive investigation. Here, using a cow-to-calf model, a comprehensive investigation was conducted to elucidate the pattern and characterization of microbial transfer from the maternal source to the offspring. RESULTS: The microbiota in the rumen and feces of dairy cows were divided into two clusters via enterotype analysis. The cows from the enterotype distinguished by Prevotella in the rumen had better production performance, whereas no difference was observed in the cows classified by feces enterotype. Furthermore, through a pairwise combination of fecal and ruminal enterotypes, we screened a group of dairy cows with excellent phenotypes. The gastrointestinal microbiomes of cows with different phenotypes and their offspring differed significantly. The rumen was a more important microbial source for meconium than feces. Transmission of beneficial bacteria from mother to offspring was observed. Additionally, the meconium inherits advantageous metabolic functions of the rumen. The resistome features of the rumen, feces, and meconium were consistent, and resistome abundance from cows to calves showed an expanding trend. The interaction between antibiotic-resistance genes and mobile genetic elements from the rumen to meconium was the most remarkable. The diversity of core metabolites from cows to calves was stable and not affected by differences in phenotypes. However, the abundance of specific metabolites varied greatly. CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates the microbial taxa, metabolic function, and resistome characteristics of maternal and neonatal microbiomes, and reveals the potential vertical transmission of the microbiome from a cow-to-calf model. These findings provide new insights into the transgenerational transmission pattern of the microbiome. Video Abstract.

Gut microbiome profiling was performed on 510 fecal specimens using 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the V4-V5 hypervariable region. We classified fecal specimens by antibiotic exposure into 5 categories: Beta-lactam, Fluoroquinolone (FQ), Beta-lactam & FQ Group, Other Antibiotics, and No Antibiotic (No Abx). Mixed-effects regression models were utilized to identify changes in microbial diversity and in the centered log-ratio (CLR) transformed abundance of genera while adjusting for important covariates. RESULTS: Antibiotic administration was associated with a significant decrease in the Shannon alpha diversity index, a decreased abundance of 11 taxa including Eubacterium and Ruminococcus, and an increased abundance of 16 taxa including Enterococcus and Staphylococcus. Exposure to Beta-lactam antibiotics was associated with an increased abundance of 10 taxa including Enterococcus and a decreased abundance of 5 taxa including Eubacterium while exposure to FQ antibiotics was associated with an increased abundance of 3 taxa and a decreased abundance of 4 taxa including Ruminococcus. CONCLUSIONS: Beta-lactam antibiotics and FQ antibiotics have a profound impact on the gut microbiota in kidney transplant recipients. Given the link of the gut microbiota to infectious complications, antibiotic associated changes in the microbiota may lead to an increased risk for further infections.

Enterobacter species are included among the normal human gut microflora and persist in a diverse range of other environmental niches. They have become important opportunistic nosocomial pathogens known to harbour plasmid-mediated multi-class antimicrobial resistance (AMR) determinants. Global AMR surveillance of Enterobacterales isolates shows the genus is second to Klebsiella in terms of frequency of carbapenem resistance. Enterobacter taxonomy is confusing and standard species identification methods are largely inaccurate or insufficient. There are currently 27 named species and a total of 46 taxa in the genus distinguishable via average nucleotide identity (ANI) calculation between pairs of genomic sequences. Here we describe an Enterobacter strain, ECC3473, isolated from the wastewater of an Australian hospital whose species could not be determined by standard methods nor by ribosomal RNA gene multi-locus typing. AIM: To characterise ECC3473 in terms of phenotypic and genotypic antimicrobial resistance, biochemical characteristics and taxonomy as well as to determine the global distribution of the novel species to which it belongs. METHODS: Standard broth dilution and disk diffusion were used to determine phenotypic AMR. The strain's complete genome, including plasmids, was obtained following long- and short read sequencing and a novel long/short read hybrid assembly and polishing, and the genomic basis of AMR was determined. Phylogenomic analysis and quantitative measures of relatedness (ANI, digital DNA-DNA hybridisation, and difference in G+C content) were used to study the taxonomic relationship between ECC3473 and Enterobacter type-strains. NCBI and PubMLST databases and the literature were searched for additional members of the novel species to determine its global distribution. RESULTS: ECC3473 is one of 21 strains isolated globally belonging to a novel Enterobacter species for which the name, Enterobacter adelaidei sp. nov. is proposed. The novel species was found to be resilient in its capacity to persist in contaminated water and adaptable in its ability to accumulate multiple transmissible AMR determinants. CONCLUSION: E. adelaidei sp. nov. may become increasingly important to the dissemination of AMR.

For this purpose, 6 pig farms were environmentally sampled. Farms were affiliated with a production company that handle the majority of the pigs slaughtered in Spain. This study investigated the relationship among high health and low health status farms using high throughput 16S rRNA gene sequencing. In addition, to identify ecologically relevant functions and potential pathogens based on the 16S rRNA gene sequences obtained, functional Annotation with PROkaryotic TAXa (FAPROTAX) was performed. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: This study reveals notable differences in microbial communities between farms with persistent health issues and those with good health outcomes, suggesting a need for protocols tailored to address specific challenges. The variation in microbial populations among farms underscores the need for specific and eco-friendly cleaning and disinfection protocols. These measures are key to enhancing the sustainability of livestock farming, ensuring safer products and boosting competitive edge in the market.

Emerging evidence is revealing the impact of the gut microbiome on hematopoietic and solid organ transplantation. Prior studies postulate that this influence is mediated by bioactive metabolites produced by gut-dwelling commensal bacteria. However, gut microbial metabolite production has not previously been measured among heart transplant (HT) recipients. METHODS: In order to investigate the potential influence of the gut microbiome and its metabolites on HT, we analyzed the composition and metabolite production of the fecal microbiome among 48 HT recipients at the time of HT. RESULTS: Compared to 20 healthy donors, HT recipients have significantly reduced alpha, i.e. within-sample, microbiota diversity, with significantly lower abundances of key anaerobic commensal bacteria and higher abundances of potentially pathogenic taxa that have been correlated with adverse outcomes in other forms of transplantation. HT recipients have a wide range of microbiota-derived fecal metabolite concentrations, with significantly reduced levels of immune modulatory metabolites such as short chain fatty acids and secondary bile acids compared to healthy donors. These differences were likely due to disease severity and prior antibiotic exposures but were not explained by other demographic or clinical factors. CONCLUSIONS: Key potentially immune modulatory gut microbial metabolites are quantifiable and significantly reduced among HT recipients compared to healthy donors. Further study is needed to understand whether this wide range of gut microbial dysbiosis and metabolite alterations impact clinical outcomes and if they can be used as predictive biomarkers or manipulated to improve transplant outcomes.

We evaluated whether the sputum bacterial microbiome differs between nontuberculous mycobacteria pulmonary disease (NTM-PD) patients with stable disease not requiring antibiotic treatment and those requiring antibiotics. METHODS: We collected sputum samples from 21 clinically stable NTM-PD patients (stable group) and 14 NTM-PD patients needing antibiotic treatment (treatment group). We also obtained 13 follow-up samples from the stable group. We analyzed the 48 samples using 16S rRNA gene sequencing (V3-V4 region) and compared the groups. RESULTS: In the linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) analysis, the species Porphyromonas pasteri, Haemophilus parahaemolyticus, Prevotella nanceiensis, and Gemella haemolysans were significantly more prevalent in the sputum of the stable group compared to the treatment group. No taxa showed significant differences in alpha-/beta-diversity or LEfSe between the 21 baseline and 13 follow-up sputum samples in the stable group. In the stable group, the genus Bergeyella and species Prevotella oris were less common in patients who achieved spontaneous culture conversion (n = 9) compared to those with persistent NTM positivity (n = 12) (effect size 3.04, p = 0.039 for Bergeyella; effect size 3.64, p = 0.033 for P. oris). In the treatment group, H. parainfluenzae was more common in patients with treatment success (n = 7) than in treatment-refractory patients (n = 7) (effect size 4.74, p = 0.013). CONCLUSIONS: Our study identified distinct bacterial taxa in the sputum of NTM-PD patients based on disease status. These results suggest the presence of a microbial environment that helps maintain disease stability.

The role of microbiota in the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis (UC) has been increasingly recognized. However, most of the reports are from Western populations. In Middle Eastern countries, including Saudi Arabia, little is known about the role of microbiota. Therefore, our aim was to describe the bacterial microbiota profile and signature in pediatric UC in Saudi Arabia. METHODS: Twenty children with UC and 20 healthy controls enrolled in the study gave stool samples. Twenty rectal mucosal samples were taken from UC and 20 from non-UC controls. Inclusion criteria included newly diagnosed and untreated children and lack of antibiotic exposure for at least 6 months before stool collection was required for children with UC and controls. Bacterial deoxyribonucleic acid was extracted and sequenced using shotgun metagenomic analysis. Statistical analysis included Shannon alpha diversity metrics, Bray-Curtis dissimilarity, DESeq2, and biomarker discovery. RESULTS: The demographic characteristics were similar in children with UC and controls. There was a significant reduction in alpha diversity (P = 0.037) and beta diversity in samples from children with UC (P = 0.001). Many taxa were identified with log2 abundance analysis, revealing 110 and 102 species significantly depleted and enriched in UC, respectively. Eleven bacterial species' signatures were identified. CONCLUSIONS: In Saudi Arabian children with UC, we demonstrate a dysbiosis similar to reports from Western populations, possibly related to changes of lifestyle. Microbial signature discovery in this report is an important contribution to research, leading to the development of adjunctive non-invasive diagnostic options in unusual cases of UC.

Immune regulation by gut microbiota is affected by dysbiosis and may precede food allergy onset. Prior studies lacked comparisons stratified by age and clinical phenotype. OBJECTIVE: To assess the microbiome of children with food allergy (<3 years, 3-18 years) compared with similar aged children without food allergy. METHODS: A real-world prospective cross-sectional study performed from 2014 to 2019 recruited children highly likely to have milk, egg, or peanut allergy defined by history and serum IgE or confirmed by food challenge. 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing identified stool microbial DNA. Alpha and beta diversity was compared between groups with food allergy and healthy controls stratified by age. Differential abundance for non a priori taxa was accepted at absolute fold-change greater than 2 and q value less than 0.05. RESULTS: A total of 70 patients were included (56 with food allergy and 14 healthy controls). Groups were not significantly different in age, gender at birth, race, mode of delivery, breastfeeding duration, or antibiotic exposure. Younger children with food allergy had similar alpha diversity compared with controls. Beta diversity was significantly different by age (P = .001). There was differential abundance of several a priori (P < .05) taxa (including Clostridia) only in younger children. Both a priori (including Coprococcus and Clostridia) and non a priori (q < 0.05) Acidobacteria_Gp15, Aestuariispira, Tindallia, and Desulfitispora were significant in older children with food allergy, especially with peanut allergy. CONCLUSION: Dysbiosis associates with food allergy, most prominent in older children with peanut allergy. Younger children with and without food allergy have fewer differences in gut microbiota. This correlates with clinical observations of persistence of peanut allergy and improved efficacy and safety of oral immunotherapy in younger children. Age younger than 3 years should be considered when initiating therapeutic interventions.

A cross-sectional design was employed, involving 164 participants aged 18 to 65 years. Inclusion criteria comprised individuals with good oral and systemic health for the periodontal health group and those diagnosed with various stages of periodontal disease for the periodontal disease group. Dental plaque samples were meticulously collected from diverse tooth surfaces, and clinical examinations were conducted to assess periodontal health status. High-throughput sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene was utilized for microbiome analysis. RESULTS: Demographic characteristics revealed a balanced distribution between the periodontal health and disease groups. Clinical parameters, including probing depth, clinical attachment loss, and bleeding on probing, exhibited significant differences between the two groups (p < 0.001). Microbial diversity indices indicated a higher diversity in the periodontal health group compared to the disease group (p < 0.001). Analysis of relative abundance of bacterial phyla identified significant variations, with Firmicutes, Bacteroidetes, and Actinobacteria showing differential prevalence between health and disease (p < 0.05). Differentially abundant taxa analysis highlighted specific species associated with each clinical condition, including Prevotella intermedia and Porphyromonas gingivalis. Network analysis revealed complex microbial interactions within the oral microbiome. Functional predictions indicated variations in metabolic capabilities between health and disease, with potential implications for virulence and antibiotic resistance. CONCLUSION: This study provides a comprehensive analysis of the oral microbiome in periodontal health and disease, revealing significant associations between microbial composition and clinical parameters. The identification of microbial markers and functional insights enhances our understanding of the complex interplay within the oral ecosystem. These findings hold promise for advancing diagnostic and therapeutic approaches tailored to individual microbial profiles.

Artisanal cheeses usually contain a highly diverse microbial community which can significantly impact their quality and safety. Here, we describe a detailed longitudinal study assessing the impact of ripening in three natural caves on the microbiome and resistome succession across three different producers of Cabrales blue-veined cheese. RESULTS: Both the producer and cave in which cheeses were ripened significantly influenced the cheese microbiome. Lactococcus and the former Lactobacillus genus, among other taxa, showed high abundance in cheeses at initial stages of ripening, either coming from the raw material, starter culture used, and/or the environment of processing plants. Along cheese ripening in caves, these taxa were displaced by other bacteria, such as Tetragenococcus, Corynebacterium, Brevibacterium, Yaniella, and Staphylococcus, predominantly originating from cave environments (mainly food contact surfaces), as demonstrated by source-tracking analysis, strain analysis at read level, and the characterization of 613 metagenome-assembled genomes. The high abundance of Tetragenococcus koreensis and Tetragenococcus halophilus detected in cheese has not been found previously in cheese metagenomes. Furthermore, Tetragenococcus showed a high level of horizontal gene transfer with other members of the cheese microbiome, mainly with Lactococcus and Staphylococcus, involving genes related to carbohydrate metabolism functions. The resistome analysis revealed that raw milk and the associated processing environments are a rich reservoir of antimicrobial resistance determinants, mainly associated with resistance to aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, and β-lactam antibiotics and harbored by aerobic gram-negative bacteria of high relevance from a safety point of view, such as Escherichia coli, Salmonella enterica, Acinetobacter, and Klebsiella pneumoniae, and that the displacement of most raw milk-associated taxa by cave-associated taxa during ripening gave rise to a significant decrease in the load of ARGs and, therefore, to a safer end product. CONCLUSION: Overall, the cave environments represented an important source of non-starter microorganisms which may play a relevant role in the quality and safety of the end products. Among them, we have identified novel taxa and taxa not previously regarded as being dominant components of the cheese microbiome (Tetragenococcus spp.), providing very valuable information for the authentication of this protected designation of origin artisanal cheese. Video Abstract.

Ascomycetous budding yeasts are ubiquitous environmental microorganisms important in food production and medicine. Due to recent intensive genomic research, the taxonomy of yeast is becoming more organized based on the identification of monophyletic taxa. This includes genera important to humans, such as Kazachstania. Until now, Kazachstania humilis (previously Candida humilis) was regarded as a sourdough-specific yeast. In addition, any antibacterial activity has not been associated with this species. RESULTS: Previously, we isolated a yeast strain that impaired bio-hydrogen production in a dark fermentation bioreactor and inhibited the growth of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. Here, using next generation sequencing technologies, we sequenced the genome of this strain named K. humilis MAW1. This is the first genome of a K. humilis isolate not originating from a fermented food. We used novel phylogenetic approach employing the 18 S-ITS-D1-D2 region to show the placement of the K. humilis MAW1 among other members of the Kazachstania genus. This strain was examined by global phenotypic profiling, including carbon sources utilized and the influence of stress conditions on growth. Using the well-recognized bacterial model Escherichia coli AB1157, we show that K. humilis MAW1 cultivated in an acidic medium inhibits bacterial growth by the disturbance of cell division, manifested by filament formation. To gain a greater understanding of the inhibitory effect of K. humilis MAW1, we selected 23 yeast proteins with recognized toxic activity against bacteria and used them for Blast searches of the K. humilis MAW1 genome assembly. The resulting panel of genes present in the K. humilis MAW1 genome included those encoding the 1,3-β-glucan glycosidase and the 1,3-β-glucan synthesis inhibitor that might disturb the bacterial cell envelope structures. CONCLUSIONS: We characterized a non-sourdough-derived strain of K. humilis, including its genome sequence and physiological aspects. The MAW1, together with other K. humilis strains, shows the new organization of the mating-type locus. The revealed here pH-dependent ability to inhibit bacterial growth has not been previously recognized in this species. Our study contributes to the building of genome sequence-based classification systems; better understanding of K.humilis as a cell factory in fermentation processes and exploring bacteria-yeast interactions in microbial communities.

Intestinal dysbacteriosis has frequently been involved in the context of depression. Nonetheless, only scant information is available about the features and functional changes of gut microbiota in female middle-aged depression (MAD). OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore whether there are characteristic changes in the gut microbes of female MAD and whether these changes are associated with depressive-like behaviors. Meanwhile, this study observed alterations in the lipid metabolism function of gut microbes and further examined changes in plasma medium- and long-chain fatty acids (MLCFAs) in mice that underwent fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT). METHODS: Stool samples obtained from 31 MAD, along with 24 healthy individuals (HC) were analyzed by 16 S rRNA gene sequencing. Meanwhile, 14-month-old female C57BL/6J mice received antibiotic cocktails and then oral gavage of the microbiota suspension of MAD or HC for 3 weeks to reconstruct gut microbiota. The subsequent depressive-like behaviors, the composition of gut microbiota, as well as MLCFAs in the plasma were evaluated. RESULTS: A noteworthy disruption in gut microbial composition in MAD individuals compared to HC was observed. Several distinct bacterial taxa, including Dorea, Butyricicoccus, and Blautia, demonstrated associations with the demographic variables. A particular microbial panel encompassing 49 genera effectively differentiated MAD patients from HC (AUC = 0.82). Fecal microbiome transplantation from MAD subjects led to depressive-like behaviors and dysfunction of plasma MLCFAs in mice. CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that microbial dysbiosis is linked to the pathogenesis of MAD, and its role may be associated with the regulation of MLCFAs metabolism.

For this cross-sectional study, Mam-Mayan mother-infant dyads (n = 64) were recruited from 8 rural communities in the Western Highlands of Guatemala at two stages of lactation: early (6-46 days postpartum, n = 29) or late (109-184 days postpartum, n = 35). Recruited mothers had vaginally delivered singleton births, had no subclinical mastitis or antibiotic treatments, and breastfed their infants. Data collected at both stages of lactation included two 24-h recalls, milk samples, and infant growth status indicators: head-circumference-for-age-z-score (HCAZ), length-for-age-z-score (LAZ), and weight-for-age-z-score (WAZ). Infants were divided into subgroups: normal weight (WAZ ≥ -1SD) and mildly underweight (WAZ < -1SD), non-stunted (LAZ ≥ -1.5SD) and mildly stunted (LAZ < -1.5SD), and normal head-circumference (HCAZ ≥ -1SD) and smaller head-circumference (HCAZ < -1SD). HMM was identified using 16S rRNA gene sequencing; amplicon analysis was performed with the high-resolution ANCHOR pipeline, and DESeq2 identified the differentially abundant (DA) HMM at the species-level between infant growth groups (FDR < 0.05) in both early and late lactation. RESULTS: Using both cluster and univariate analyses, we identified (a) positive correlations between infant growth clusters and maternal dietary clusters, (b) both positive and negative associations among maternal macronutrient and micronutrient intakes with the HMM at the species level and (c) distinct correlations between HMM DA taxa with maternal nutrient intakes and infant z-scores that differed between breast-fed infants experiencing growth faltering and normal growth in early and late lactation. CONCLUSION: Collectively, these findings provide important evidence of the potential influence of maternal diet on the early-life growth of breastfed infants via modulation of the HMM.

Acute gastro-intestinal graft-versus-host disease (GI-GVHD) and non-relapse mortality (NRM) after allogeneic HCT are closely related to loss of microbial diversity and intestinal dominance by single taxa resulting from the use of antibiotics, dietary changes, and mucosal barrier injury. There is a paucity of data on the impact of use of antibiotics in HCT after Flu-TBI-based non-myeloablative (NMA) conditioning where there is absence of mucositis and limited malnutrition. METHODS: We did a retrospective single-center analysis of patients receiving Flu-TBI-based NMA HCT for a high-grade myeloid malignancy, mostly AML, and MDS, or acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). We analyzed the impact of pre-engraftment antibiotic exposure, prophylactic ciprofloxacin, and or treatment with broad-spectrum cephalosporin/carbapenem, on HCT outcomes, with a focus on the incidence of acute GI-GVHD by day 180 and NRM at 1 year. RESULTS: A total of 150 patients were evaluable with a median age of 62 years. Antibiotics were used in 90 patients; 60 prophylactic use only and 30 therapeutic use with or without previous prophylaxis. Antibiotic use resulted in a significant higher incidence of GI-GVHD Stage 1-4; 29% (26/90) versus 5% (3/60) in those not receiving antibiotics (OR 8.1 (95% CI 2.3-28.3), p = 0.001). Use of antibiotics resulted in higher 1-year NRM (19% (17/90) versus 10% (6/60), HR 2.3, p = 0.06), and decreased 2-year GRFS (42% (38/90) versus 55% (33/60), HR 1.7, p = 0.04), but did not impact RFS or OS. CONCLUSIONS: Use of antibiotics was related to the occurrence of GI-GVHD, NRM, and GRFS in patients receiving truly NMA HCT. Therefore, in the absence of mucositis and low incidence of bacteremia, antibiotics can and should be used restrictively in this setting.

The current study investigates the response and restoration of intestinal microbiota to/after high (Inulin-H) and low (Inulin-L) dosage of inulin supplementation or sequential antibiotics and inulin (Anti-Inulin-L) supplementation, based on analysis of 16S rRNA gene sequences in C57BL/6 mice. The number of significantly changed genera in response to inulin is highest in Anti-Inulin-L (n = 66) group, followed by Inulin-H (n = 51) and Inulin-L (n = 38) group. After inulin supplementation stops, microbiota of all studied groups tend to recover to their original states, with highest percentage of inulin-responding microbes stay significantly different at Anti-Inulin-L (93.94%) group, followed by Inulin-H (74.51%) and Inulin-L (44.12%) groups. Of note, the relative abundance of some non-inulin-responding taxa significantly increases during restoration. CONCLUSION: Sequential antibiotics and inulin supplementation induce greatest changes in the intestinal microbial composition, followed by high and low dosage of inulin. Additionally, the changes induce by supplemented inulin in the intestinal microbial community, provide a chance for some microbes to outcompete the other microbes during the spontaneous restoration.

Parents completed the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) focused on different DSM diagnostic categories: affective, anxiety, pervasive developmental, attention deficit/hyperactivity, and oppositional defiant. All the CBCL scores were corrected for gender, delivery method, gestational age, infant birth weight, occurrence of sepsis, and days on antibiotics prior statistical analyses. Canonical correlation analysis (CCA) was performed to determine the relationship between early life gut microbiome and the adjusted CBCL scores. The association of bacterial Amplicon sequence Variants (ASVs) to the CBCL scores were tested with multivariate analysis by linear models (MaAsLin). RESULTS: Nineteen children who were previously born with very low birth weight and studied while hospitalized in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) were included in this study. Statistically significant associations were observed between early life gut bacteria such as Veillonella dispar, Enterococcus, Escherichia coli, and Rumincococcus to later behavior at 4 years. No significant association could be observed with early-life gut microbiome alpha diversity and behavioral measures at 4 years. DISCUSSION: These preliminary observational data provide insight into the relationships between VLBW gut microbiome dysbiosis and childhood behavior. This study contributes to the literature on gut microbiome analysis by examining various behavioral domains using a standardized tool linked to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM).

In this study, we aimed to compare the microbiomes within cattle feces, the feedyard environment and artificially produced airborne particulate matter as a function of pen change and treatment with tylosin or probiotics. We utilized 16S rRNA sequencing to compare bacterial communities among sample types, study days, and treatment groups. RESULTS: Bacterial community diversity varied as a function of sampling day and pen change (old or new) within fecal and manure pack samples. Manure pack samples from old pens and new pens contained diverse communities of bacteria on days 0 and 84; however, by day 119 of the study these taxonomic differences were less evident. Particulate matter samples exhibited significant differences in community diversity and predominant bacterial taxa compared to the manure pack they originated from. Treatment with tylosin did not meaningfully impact bacterial communities among fecal, environmental, or particulate matter samples; however, minor differences in bacterial community structure were observed in feces from cattle treated with probiotics. DISCUSSION: This study was the first to characterize and compare microbial communities within feces, manure pack, and airborne particulate matter from the same location and as a function of tylosin and probiotic treatment, and pen change. Although fecal and environmental samples are commonly used in research studies and other monitoring programs to infer public health risk of bacteria and antimicrobial resistance determinants from feedyard environments, our study suggests that these samples may not be appropriate to infer public health risk associated with airborne particulate matter.

Asthma, a prevalent chronic inflammatory respiratory disease among children, was the focus of this study. Serum metabolism profiles were examined in patients diagnosed with both asthma and bronchiolitis by using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. METHODS: In this study, the serum samples from three distinct groups-comprising patients diagnosed with asthma, bronchiolitis, and a healthy control group-underwent comprehensive non-targeted metabolomics analysis and targeted eicosanoid profiling. RESULTS: Through both univariate and multivariate analyses, significant associations were observed between the pathophysiology of both asthma and bronchiolitis and aberrations in the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids, amino acids, purines, and pathways involving cyclooxygenases and lipoxygenases, indicative of inflammatory processes and immune responses. Furthermore, metabolic changes in phosphatidylethanolamine, saturated and monounsaturated fatty acids, and bile acids were observed in the asthma group. Bronchiolitis was distinguished by disruptions in acyl carnitine and phosphatidylcholine metabolism. CONCLUSION: This study offers a new perspective on understanding the interplay of pathogenic mechanisms underlying both asthma and bronchiolitis. Its findings are significant for enhancing the diagnostic and therapeutic strategies tailored to asthma stemming from bronchiolitis.

Forty-seven obese middle-aged women (Age: 44.5 ± 5.94 years, body fat percentage: 40.0 ± 4.1%) were recruited and assigned into four groups: control group (C, n = 12), probiotics group (P, n = 12), HIIT group (H, n = 11), and HIIT with probiotics group (HP, n = 12). All the participants consumed probiotics (Lactiplantibacillus plantarum TWK10, 6 × 1010 CFU/day) or placebo supplements daily. Exercise intervention groups conducted HIIT training (85-90% vVO2max for 2 min, followed by a 1-min inactive rest interval, repeated for 7 cycles) 3 sessions per week for 8 weeks. Anthropometry, cardiorespiratory endurance, blood glucose, and lipid profile were measured at baseline and after the 8-week intervention. RESULTS: After the intervention, there were significant changes between groups in the variations and rates of change in waist circumference, hip circumference, and TTE. The waist circumference in group H significantly increased compared to groups C and P, while group HP did not show significant difference compared to group C. On the other hand, the hip circumference decreased significantly in group HP compared to group C, and the decreased rate in group HP was significantly greater than in groups C and P. Furthermore, the increase rates in TTE were higher in group H and HP compared to group C. CONCLUSION: HIIT improves TTE but negatively affects waist circumference compared to the control group. However, when combined with probiotics, the probiotics not only help enhance TTE but also counteract the negative impact on waist circumference and further reduce hip circumference, resulting in a synergistic effect. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov, identifier NCT06285578.

In a cross-sectional study of 123 healthy lactating women, HM samples were collected up to 1 month postpartum and analyzed using the Biocrates MxP Quant 500 kit. Maternal and neonatal clinical, anthropometric, and nutritional data were collected. A total of 432 metabolites were quantified and categorized into 20 groups. The metabolomic profiles formed three distinct clusters, primarily driven by triglyceride concentration differences. Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) levels were higher in HM from mothers with vaginal delivery compared to C-section births and differences in hexoses were found between exclusive and mixed-feeding practices. Maternal diets rich in lipids and animal proteins were associated with elevated amino acids, sphingolipids, and glycosyl-ceramides. CONCLUSION: The HM metabolome was grouped into three clusters influenced by delivery mode, lactation practices, and maternal diet. This comprehensive analysis opens new avenues to explore HM composition and offers valuable insights for future dietary interventions aimed at modulating HM.

Alcohol use disorder (AUD) is a global health problem with limited therapeutic options. The biochemical mechanisms that lead to this disorder are not yet fully understood, and in this respect, metabolomics represents a promising approach to decipher metabolic events related to AUD. The plasma metabolome contains a plethora of bioactive molecules that reflects the functional changes in host metabolism but also the impact of the gut microbiome and nutritional habits. METHODS: In this study, we investigated the impact of severe AUD (sAUD), and of a 3-week period of alcohol abstinence, on the blood metabolome (non-targeted LC-MS metabolomics analysis) in 96 sAUD patients hospitalized for alcohol withdrawal. RESULTS: We found that the plasma levels of different lipids ((lyso)phosphatidylcholines, long-chain fatty acids), short-chain fatty acids (i.e. 3-hydroxyvaleric acid) and bile acids were altered in sAUD patients. In addition, several microbial metabolites, including indole-3-propionic acid, p-cresol sulfate, hippuric acid, pyrocatechol sulfate, and metabolites belonging to xanthine class (paraxanthine, theobromine and theophylline) were sensitive to alcohol exposure and alcohol withdrawal. 3-Hydroxyvaleric acid, caffeine metabolites (theobromine, paraxanthine, and theophylline) and microbial metabolites (hippuric acid and pyrocatechol sulfate) were correlated with anxiety, depression and alcohol craving. Metabolomics analysis in postmortem samples of frontal cortex and cerebrospinal fluid of those consuming a high level of alcohol revealed that those metabolites can be found also in brain tissue. CONCLUSIONS: Our data allow the identification of neuroactive metabolites, from interactions between food components and microbiota, which may represent new targets arising in the management of neuropsychiatric diseases such as sAUD. FUNDING: Gut2Behave project was initiated from ERA-NET NEURON network (Joint Transnational Call 2019) and was financed by Academy of Finland, French National Research Agency (ANR-19-NEUR-0003-03) and the Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FRS-FNRS; PINT-MULTI R.8013.19, Belgium). Metabolomics analysis of the TSDS samples was supported by grant from the Finnish Foundation for Alcohol Studies.

Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging remain unknown. METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging. CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential therapeutic targets.

This age- and sex-matched case-control study involved 18 patients with unclassified diabetes, 18 patients with classic type 1 diabetes, 13 patients with type 2 diabetes, and 18 healthy individuals. Metagenomics facilitated the profiling of the gut microbiota, while untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was used to quantify the serum lipids and metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings revealed a unique gut microbiota composition in unclassified diabetes patients, marked by a depletion of Butyrivibrio proteoclasticus and Clostridium and an increase in Ruminococcus torques and Lachnospiraceae bacterium 8_1_57FAA. Comparative analysis identified the combined marker panel of five bacterial species, seven serum biomarkers, and three clinical parameters could differentiate patients with UDM from HCs with an AUC of 0.94 (95% CI 0.85-1). Notably, the gut microbiota structure of patients with unclassified diabetes resembled that of type 2 diabetes patients, especially regarding disrupted lipid and branched-chain amino acid metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: Despite sharing certain metabolic features with type 2 diabetes, unclassified diabetes presents unique features. The distinct microbiota and metabolites in unclassified diabetes patients suggest a significant role in modulating glucose, lipid, and amino acid metabolism, potentially influencing disease progression. Further longitudinal studies are essential to explore therapeutic strategies targeting the gut microbiota and metabolites to modify the disease trajectory.

Microscopic colitis (MC) is a common cause of chronic diarrhea, predominantly among older adults. Emerging evidence suggests that perturbations of gut microbiome and metabolome may play an important role in MC pathogenesis. OBJECTIVE: To comprehensively characterize alterations of the gut microbial and metabolic composition in MC. DESIGN: We established a longitudinal cohort of adult patients with MC and two control groups of individuals - chronic diarrhea controls and age- and sex-matched controls without diarrhea. Using stool samples, gut microbiome was analyzed by whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing, and gut metabolome was profiled by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. Per-feature enrichment analyses of microbial species, metabolic pathways, and metabolites were done using multivariable linear models both cross-sectionally comparing MC to controls and longitudinally according to disease activity. Lastly, we performed multi-omics association analyses to assess the relationship between microbiome and metabolome data. RESULTS: We included 683 participants, 131 with active MC (66 with both active and remission samples), 159 with chronic diarrhea, and 393 age- and sex-matched controls without diarrhea. The stool microbiome in active MC was characterized by a lower alpha diversity as compared to controls and the remission phase of MC. Compared to controls, we identified eight enriched species in MC, most of which were pro-inflammatory oral-typical species, such as Veillonella dispar and Haemophilus parainfluenzae . In contrast, 11 species, including anti-inflammatory microbes such as Blautia glucerasea and Bacteroides stercoris, were depleted in MC. Similarly, pro-inflammatory metabolites, including lactosylceramides, ceramides, lysophospholipids, and lysoplasmalogens were enriched in active MC as compared to controls or MC cases in remission. Multi-omics association analyses revealed strong and concordant links between microbes, their metabolic pathways, and metabolomic profiles, supporting the tight interplay between disturbances in stool microbiome and metabolome in MC. CONCLUSION: We observed a significant shift in stool microbial and metabolomic composition in MC. Our findings could be used in the future for development of non-invasive biomarkers for diagnosing and monitoring MC and developing novel therapeutics. WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC: Microbiome dysbiosis has been proposed to contribute to microscopic colitis (MC) pathogenesis.However, previous studies have been limited by small sample sizes, reliance on 16S rRNA sequencing technique, potential confounding by stool consistency, and lack of functional analyses of microbiome and longitudinal data. Moreover, the metabolomic composition of MC remain largely unknown. WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS: In this largest longitudinal MC cohort with two control groups - chronic diarrhea controls and controls without diarrhea, gut microbiome of MC is characterized by a lower alpha diversity, enriched pro-inflammatory oral-typical species and depleted anti-inflammatory beneficial species.Gut metabolome of MC shows significant enrichment of pro-inflammatory metabolites, including lactosylceramides, ceramides, lysophospholipids, and lysoplasmalogens. Multi-omics analyses demonstrate strong and concordant relationships between microbes, metabolic pathways, and metabolomic profiles. HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH PRACTICE OR POLICY: Our findings could facilitate development of non-invasive biomarkers and novel therapeutics for MC.

Advances in metagenome sequencing data continue to enable new methods for analyzing biological systems. When handling microbial profile data, metagenome sequencing has proven to be far more comprehensive than traditional methods such as 16s rRNA data, which rely on partial sequences. Microbial community profiling can be used to obtain key biological insights that pave the way for more accurate understanding of complex systems that are critical for advancing biomedical research and healthcare. However, such attempts have mostly used partial or incomplete data to accurately capture those associations. METHODS: This study introduces a novel computational approach for the identification of co-occurring microbial communities using the abundance and functional roles of species-level microbiome data. The proposed approach is then used to identify signature pathways associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Furthermore, we developed a computational pipeline to identify microbial species co-occurrences from metagenome data at various granularity levels. RESULTS: When comparing the IBD group to a control group, we show that certain co-occurring communities of species are enriched for potential pathways. We also show that the identified co-occurring microbial species operate as a community to facilitate pathway enrichment. CONCLUSIONS: The obtained findings suggest that the proposed network model, along with the computational pipeline, provide a valuable analytical tool to analyze complex biological systems and extract pathway signatures that can be used to diagnose certain health conditions.

A single-center, double-blind, placebo-controlled randomized trial was conducted to test the effects of 14 days of beetroot juice supplementation, rich in nitrates and betalains, on functional and biological outcomes in adults aged between 20 and 60 years with long COVID. Participants were randomized 1:1 to receive either daily oral supplementation with 200 mL beetroot juice (∼600 mg nitrate) or placebo (∼60 mg nitrate) for 14 days. The primary endpoint was the change from baseline to day 14 in a fatigue resistance test. Secondary outcomes included the distance walked on the 6-min walk test, handgrip strength, and flow-mediated dilation. Secondary endpoints also included changes from baseline in circulating inflammatory mediators and metagenomic and fecal water metabolomic profiles. Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) models were built to evaluate the differences in biological variables associated with the interventions. RESULTS: Thirty-one participants were randomized in the study. Twenty-five of them (median (interquartile range) age 40 (10), 14 [56 %] women), received either beetroot juice (15) or placebo (10) and completed the study. At 14 days, fatigue resistance significantly improved from baseline (mean difference [standard error]: +21.8 [3.7] s; p < 0.001) with no significant differences between intervention groups. A significant increase from baseline in the distance walked on the 6-min walk test was observed (mean difference [standard error]: +30.0 [9.4] m; p = 0.03), which was not different between groups. Flow-mediated dilation did not differ between participants who received beetroot juice and those on placebo. PLS-DA models allowed correct classification of participants with 92.2 ± 4.4 % accuracy. Those who ingested red beetroot juice had a greater abundance of bacteria with well-known beneficial effects, including Akkermansia, Oscillospira, Prevotella, Roseburia, Ruminococcaceae, and Turicibacter, compared with placebo. Participants allocated to beetroot juice supplementation were also characterized by significantly higher levels of fecal nicotinate, trimethylamine, and markers of beetroot juice intake (e.g., 5,6-dihydroxyindole). Finally, higher levels of interferon gamma and macrophage inflammatory protein-1β were found in participants who consumed beetroot juice. CONCLUSION: Beetroot juice supplementation for two weeks did not to induce significant improvements in functional outcomes in adults with long COVID compared with placebo. Beneficial effects were observed in both gut microbiota composition (i.e., increase in probiotic species) and inflammatory mediators. TRIAL REGISTRATION: Trial was registered under ClinicalTrials.gov. Identifier no. NCT06535165.

The Albumin-Bilirubin (ALBI) score and grade are widely used to stratify patients with primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) into different disease statuses and risk levels. Recent studies have increasingly highlighted the role of gut microbiota in autoimmune liver diseases. This study aimed to investigate the differences in gut microbiota among PBC patients with varying ALBI grades. METHODS: Clinical data and stool samples were collected from outpatient and inpatient PBC patients between 2019 and 2022. Gut microbiota profiles were obtained using 16S rDNA sequencing of stool samples. We analyzed alpha diversity, beta diversity, LEfSe analysis and pathway function prediction. Additionally, various machine learning methods-including random forest (RF), lasso, gradient boosting machine (GBM) and support vector machine (SVM)-were employed to identify key features and to build and validate predictive models using bootstrap techniques. RESULTS: Clinical characteristics of ALBI grade 1 patients were comparatively better than those of ALBI grade 2 and 3 patients, including multiple laboratory indices. Gut microbiota analysis revealed that species richness and balance were higher in ALBI grade 1 patients. Both the comparison of the most abundant genera and the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) in LEfSe demonstrated that Lachnospira had a higher abundance and better discriminative ability in ALBI grade 1. Pathway function prediction indicated that sulfur metabolism was upregulated in higher ALBI grades. Furthermore, RF identified 10 specific genera, which were then used to build and validate models for discriminating PBC patients according to their ALBI grades. All three models, developed using different machine learning methods, demonstrated good discrimination ability (mean AUC 0.75-0.80). CONCLUSION: This study highlights significant differences in gut microbiota profiles among PBC patients with different ALBI grades. The increased abundance of Lachnospira and upregulation of sulfur metabolism pathways are notable in patients with lower ALBI grades. The machine learning models developed based on gut microbiota features offer promising tools for discriminating between PBC patients with varying disease severities, which could enhance the precision of treatment strategies.

Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) is an autoimmune disorder with unclear molecular mechanisms. While current diagnosis is well-established, understanding of the gut-thyroid axis in HT remains limited. This study aimed to uncover novel molecular signatures in HT by integrating gut metagenome and host transcriptome data (miRNA/mRNA), potentially elucidating disease pathogenesis and identifying new therapeutic targets. METHODS: We recruited 31 early HT patients and 30 healthy controls in a two-stage study (discovery and validation). Blood and fecal samples underwent RNA and metagenomic sequencing, respectively. Integrative analysis included differential expression, weighted correlation network, correlation and random forest analyses. Regression models and ROC curve analysis were used to evaluate the significance of identified molecular signatures in HT. RESULTS: Integrative analysis revealed subtle changes in gut microbiota diversity and composition in early HT, increased abundance of Bacillota_A and Spirochaetota at the phylum level, and significant differences in 24 genera and 67 species. Ecological network analysis indicated an imbalance in the gut microbiota with reduced inhibitory interactions against pathogenic genera in HT. Functional analysis showed changes in infection- and immune-related pathways. Three characteristic species (Salaquimonas_sp002400845, Clostridium_AI_sp002297865, and Enterocloster_citroniae) were identified as most relevant to HT. Analysis of miRNA and mRNA expression profiles uncovered pathways related to immune response, inflammation, infection, metabolism, proliferation, and thyroid cancer in HT. Based on correlations with HT and interactions between them, six characteristic RNAs (hsa-miR-548aq-3p, hsa-miR-374a-5p, GADD45A, IRS2, SMAD6, WWTR1) were identified. Furthermore, our study uncovered significant gut microbiota-host transcriptome interactions in HT, revealing enrichment in metabolic, immune, and cancer-related pathways, particularly with strong associations among those 9 key molecular signatures. The validation stage confirmed improved HT classification accuracy by combining these signatures (AUC = 0.95, ACC = 0.85), suggesting their potential significance in understanding HT pathogenesis. CONCLUSION: Our study reveals novel molecular signatures linking gut microbiome and host transcriptome in HT, providing new insights into the disease pathogenesis. These findings not only enhance our understanding of the gut-thyroid axis but also suggest potential new directions for therapeutic interventions in HT.

Stool samples of 26 patients with SSc, 18 patients with VEDOSS and 20 healthy controls (HC) were collected. The GM was assessed through 16S rRNA sequencing, while SCFAs and FFAs were assessed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. RESULTS: In patients with VEDOSS, an increase in Bacteroidales and Oscillospirales orders and a decrease in Bacilli class, Blautia, Romboutsia, Streptococcus and Turicibacter genera was detected in comparison with HC. In patients with SSc, an elevated number of Acidaminococcaceae and Sutterellaceae families, along with a decrease of the Peptostreptococcaceae family and Anaerostipes, Blautia, Romboutsia and Turicibacter genera was found in comparison with HC. Patients with SSc and VEDOSS had a significantly lower butyrate and higher acetate with respect to HC. In VEDOSS, an increase in Oscillospiraceae family and Anaerostipes genus, and a decrease in Alphaproteobacteria class, and Lactobacillales order was identified with respect to SSc. Moreover, patients with VEDOSS exhibited higher acetate and lower valerate compared with definite SSc. CONCLUSION: A GM dysbiosis with depletion of beneficial anti-inflammatory bacteria (especially butyrate-producing) and a significant decrease in faecal butyrate was identified in patients with VEDOSS. This early GM imbalance may foster the growth of inflammatory microbes, worsening intestinal dysbiosis and inflammation in early SSc stages. The potential butyrate administration in early disease phases might be considered as a novel therapeutic approach to mitigate gastrointestinal discomfort and progression preserving patient's quality of life.

The infant gut microbiome undergoes rapid changes in the first year of life, supporting normal development and long-term health. While diet shapes this process, the role of fibers in complementary foods on gut microbiome maturation is poorly understood. OBJECTIVES: We explored how the transition from human milk to fibers in complementary foods shapes the taxonomic and functional maturation of the gut microbiome within the first year of life. METHODS: We assessed the longitudinal and cross-sectional development of infant gut microbiomes (N=68 infants) and metabolomes (N=33 infants) using linear mixed models to uncover their associations to dietary fibers and their food sources. Fiber intakes were assessed with 3-day food records (months 3,6,9,12) relying on CODEX-compliant fiber fraction values, and questionnaires tracked the overall complementary food introduction. Bacterial species were identified and quantified via MetaPhlAn2 from metagenomic data, and metabolomic profiles were obtained using four LC-MS methods. RESULTS: We identified 176 complementary food fiber-bacterial species associations. First plant-based fibers associated to microbiota compositions similar to breastfeeding, and further associated with aromatic amino acid metabolites, including 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (Total dietary fiber - Complementary foods (g) - β=3.50, CI 2.48-4.52, p=6.53x10-5). Distinct fibers from different food categories showed unique associations with specific bacterial taxa. Key species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitznii, associated with oat fibers (g/MJ, β=2.18, CI 1.36-2.84, p=6.12x10-6), reflective of maturing microbial communities. Fiber intake during weaning associated with shifts in metabolite profiles, including immunomodulatory metabolites, with fiber effects observed in a source- and timing-dependent manner, implicated in gradual microbiome diversification. CONCLUSIONS: Introducing complementary dietary fibers during the weaning period supports gut microbiome diversification and stabilization. Even minor dietary variations showed significant associations with microbial taxa and functions from the onset of weaning, highlighting the importance of infant dietary recommendations that support the gut microbiome maturation during early life. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01735123. Date of registration: November 24, 2012. https://www. CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT01735123.

The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome. METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 16S and 18S rRNA gene markers. RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the Eukaryotic community. CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

Airway microbiome has been linked to asthma heterogeneity, yet little is known about the associations between airway microbiota and type 2 (T2) asthma phenotype and severity. OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the relationship of nasopharyngeal (NP) and induced sputum (IS) microbiota to the phenotypic features of T2 asthma. METHODS: NP and IS samples from subjects with T2 mild-to-moderate asthma (n=23) and severe asthma (n=21) and healthy controls (n=16) were analyzed. Bacterial microbiota and functional profiles were compared. The correlation between microbial communities and clinical as well as inflammatory features was examined in asthmatics of two statuses. RESULTS: Differences in NP and IS microbiota were associated with T2 asthma phenotype. Alterations in NP microbiota were more reflective of T2 inflammation and severity, with additional stratification of a subgroup characterized by significant elevations in T2 inflammatory biomarkers and reductions in bacterial richness and diversity (P < .05). Burkholderia-Caballeronia-Paraburkholderia, Ralstonia and Rhodococcus were identified as hub taxa within NP microbial network in T2 severe asthma, which were prevalent in the entire airway and involved in bacterial functions including inflammatory and steroid responses (P < .05). The composition and diversity of IS microbiota were complex, with Veillonella as the most altered genus, showing an increase with increasing asthma severity. CONCLUSION: Our work revealed the significant associations of microbiota perturbations throughout the entire respiratory tract to the extent of T2 inflammation, phenotype and severity in T2 asthma. The specific taxa identified invite further mechanistic investigations to unravel their possibility as biomarkers and therapeutic targets for T2 severe asthma.

Long-distance road transportation is a common practice in the beef industry, frequently resulting in bovine respiratory disease (BRD) and compromised growth performance. However, a comprehensive investigation integrating clinical performance, physiological conditions, and nasopharyngeal microflora remains lacking. METHODS: This study aimed to evaluate the respiratory health and immunometabolic status of 54 beef calves subjected to a 3000-km journey. The respiratory health of calves was monitored over 60 days post-arrival using a modified clinical scoring system. Nasopharyngeal microflora and venous blood samples were collected at 3 time points: before transportation (A), 30 days post-arrival (B), and 60 days post-arrival (C), for 16S rRNA microbiomics, whole-blood transcriptomics, serum metabolomics, and laboratory assays. RESULT: Within the first week post-arrival, the appetite and mental scores of calves dropped to zero, while other respiratory-related scores progressively declined over the 60 days. The α-diversity of nasopharyngeal microflora in calves was similar at time points A and B, both significantly higher than at time point C. The structure of these microbial communities varied significantly across different time points, with a notably higher relative abundance of BRD-related genera, such as Pasteurella and Mannheimia, detected at time point A compared to B and C. The composition and gene expression profiles of circulating blood cells at time point A were significantly different from those at B and C. Specifically, higher expression levels of oxidative- and inflammatory-related genes, cytokines, and enzymes were observed at time point A compared to B and C. Higher levels of catabolism-related metabolites and enzymes were detected at time point A, while higher levels of anabolism-related metabolites and enzymes were observed at time points B and C. Additionally, significant correlations were found among microorganisms, genes, and metabolites with differing abundances, expression levels, and concentrations across time points. Stronger correlations were observed between calves' performance and nasopharyngeal microflora and immunometabolic status at time point A compared to B or C. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these results confirm that 3000 km of road transportation significantly alters the composition and gene expression profiles of circulating white blood cells in calves, affects their metabolic processes, disrupts the balance of the respiratory microbial community, and leads to pronounced respiratory symptoms that persist for at least 60 days. During this period, the influenced composition and gene expression of circulating blood cells, metabolic processes, and nasopharyngeal microbial community gradually return to equilibrium, and the respiratory symptoms gradually diminish. This observational research indicates that transportation induces BRD in calves by disrupting the homeostasis of their immune function, metabolic processes, and nasopharyngeal microbial community. However, these results and their underlying molecular mechanisms warrant further validation through well-designed in vivo and in vitro confirmatory experiments with larger sample size. Video Abstract.

The fecal microbiome from healthy volunteers (HC), colorectal adenoma (CRA), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and CRC patients were analyzed by 16s rRNA gene sequencing. In an azoxymethane (AOM)/dextran-sulfate-sodium (DSS)-induced CRC mouse, the effect of FMT from HC, CRA, CRC, and IBD patients on CRC mice was assessed by histological analysis. Expression of inflammation- EMT-associated proteins and Wnt/β-catenin pathway were assessed using qRT-PCR and western blot. The ratio of the fecal microorganisms and metabolomics alteration after FMT were also assessed. RESULT: Prevotella, Faecalibacterium, Phascolarctobacterium, Veillonella, Alistipes, Fusobacterium, Oscillibacter, Blautia, and Ruminococcus abundance was different among HC, IBD, CRC, and CRA patients. HC-FMT alleviated disease progression and inflammatory response in CRC mice, inhibited splenic T help (Th)1 and Th17 cell numbers, and suppressed the EMT and Wnt/β-catenin pathways in tumor tissues of CRC mice. IBD-FMT, CRA-FMT, and CRC-FMT played deleterious roles; the CRC-FMT mice exhibited the most malignant phenotype. Compared with the non-FMT CRC mice, Muribaculaceae abundance was lower after FMT, especially lowest in the IBD-FMT group; while Lactobacillus abundance was higher after FMT and especially high in HC-FMT. Akkermansia and Ileibacterium abundance increased after FMT-HC compared to other groups. Metabolite correlation analysis revealed that Muribaculaceae abundance was significantly correlated with metabolites such as Betaine, LysoPC, and Soyasaponin III. Lactobacillus abundance was positively correlated with Taurocholic acid 3-sulfate, and Ileibacterium abundance was positively correlated with Linoleoyl ethanolamide. CONCLUSION: The different intestinal microbiota communities of HC, IBD, CRA, and CRC patients may be attributed to the different modulation effects of FMT on CRC mice. CRC-FMT promoted, while HC-FMT inhibited the progress of CRC. Increased linoleoyl ethanolamide levels and abundance of Muribaculaceae, Akkermansia, and Ileibacterium and reduced Fusobacterium might participate in inhibiting CRC initiation and development. This study demonstrated that FMT intervention could restore the intestinal microbiota and metabolomics of CRC mice, suggesting FMT as a potential strategy for CRC therapy.

Evidence indicates a close association between iron overload (IO) and the pathogenesis of chronic liver diseases, highlighting the potential for interventions targeted at IO to impede or decelerate the progression of chronic liver diseases. Diammonium glycyrrhizinate (DG), the medicinal form of glycyrrhizic acid, a principal constituent of licorice, has been clinically employed as a hepatoprotective agent; however, its protective effect against IO-induced liver injury and underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive. PURPOSE: The aim of the present study is to investigate the hepatoprotective effect of DG against IO-induced liver injury with a focus on the gut-liver axis. STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Animal models of IO-induced liver injury and DG treatment have been established in vivo. Iron deposition, liver injury, intestinal barrier damage, and liver inflammation were assessed in mice treated with iron dextran or DG. The microbiome composition in feces was analyzed using 16S rRNA full-length sequencing. Bile acids (BAs) profiles in feces were detected by UPLC-Q-TOF-MS technique, and the expression levels of receptors, enzymes or transporters involved in BAs metabolism were also determined. RESULTS: DG partially reduced the iron deposition and the levels of ferrous ion in the livers of mice with IO, thereby mitigating oxidative damage. DG also improved gut microbiota dysbiosis, repaired intestinal barrier damage, inhibited endotoxin translocation to the liver, and subsequently suppressed TLR4/NF-κB/NLRP3 pathway-mediated liver inflammation caused by IO. Moreover, DG modulated BAs metabolism disorder in IO mice, reducing the accumulation of BAs in the liver. CONCLUSION: DG alleviates IO-induced liver injury in mice by regulating the gut-liver axis. This study provides novel insights into the underlying mechanisms through which DG ameliorates liver injury caused by IO.

In this study, we delineated the pathogen spectrum and commensal microorganisms in the lower respiratory tract of various pulmonary diseases using metagenomic sequencing. We analyzed the disparities and commonalities of the microbial features and examined their correlation with disease characteristics. RESULTS: We observed distinct pathogen profiles and a diversity in lower airway microbiome in patients diagnosed with cancer, interstitial lung disease, bronchiectasis, common pneumonia, Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) pneumonia, and severe pneumonia. DISCUSSION: This study illustrates the utility of Metagenomic Next-generation Sequencing (mNGS) in identifying pathogens and analyzing the lower respiratory microbiome, which is important for understanding the microbiological aspect of pulmonary diseases and essential for their early and precise diagnosis.

Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa (Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values. CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as antibiotic use.

We performed a multicenter observational study nested within SPARC IBD. Quiescent inflammation was defined by fecal calprotectin level < 150 mcg/g. Persistent symptoms were defined by CD-PRO2. Active CD (aCD) and non-IBD diarrhea-predominant irritable bowel syndrome (IBS-D) were included as controls. RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients with qCD + S, 274 qCD-S, 21 aCD, and 40 IBS-D underwent paired shotgun metagenomic sequencing and untargeted metabolomic profiling. The fecal metabolome in qCD + S was significantly different relative to qCD-S and IBS-D but not aCD. Patients with qCD + S were enriched in sulfur-containing amino acid pathways, including cysteine and methionine, as well as serine, glycine, and threonine. Glutathione and nicotinate/nicotinamide pathways were also enriched in qCD + S relative to qCD-S, suggestive of mitochondrial dysfunction, a downstream target of H2S signaling. Multi-omic integration demonstrated that enriched microbes in qCD + S were associated with important sulfur metabolic pathways. Bacterial sulfur metabolic genes, including CTH, isfD, sarD, and asrC, were dysregulated in qCD + S. Finally, sulfur metabolites with and without sulfidogenic microbes showed good accuracy in predicting the presence of qCD + S. DISCUSSION: Microbial-derived sulfur pathways and downstream mitochondrial function are perturbed in qCD + S, which implicate H2S signaling in the pathogenesis of this condition. Future studies will determine whether targeting H2S pathways results in improved quality of life in qCD + S.

Respiratory disease outbreaks frequently occur in settings where individuals are in close contact, for example, schools and factories. However, the transmission patterns of oropharyngeal microbiota among healthy individuals living in clusters are unclear. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the respiratory tract bacteria distribution and transmission patterns among individuals in close contact. METHODS: A total of 36 freshmen from Peking University Medical School participated in the study. We collected pharyngeal swabs on the first day of enrollment, 15, 30, and 60 days after cohabitation. DNA was extracted from the swabs and subjected to high-throughput sequencing to profile the microbial composition. Statistical analyses were performed to assess diversity and significance. RESULTS: Neisseriaceae, Prevotellaceae, and Streptococcaceae were the most abundant bacterial families detected. Over time, changes were observed in the bacterial communities, with a tendency for increased similarity between dormitory room members. By day 60 of cohabitation, the bacterial communities appeared to be more similar compared to the baseline (prior to cohabitation). The transmission patterns included spreading with colonization, spreading without colonization, and non-spreading. Bacteria belonging to the core genera are most likely to spread and colonize easily. CONCLUSION: The risk of healthy cohabitants acquiring respiratory pathogens through close contact may be overestimated in epidemiological studies. Therefore, monitoring the spread of core genera that are easily transmitted and colonized is crucial for effective prevention of respiratory pathogen transmission.

Food allergies, particularly peanut (PN) allergies, are a growing concern, with fatal anaphylaxis incidents often reported. While palforzia is the sole FDA-approved drug for managing PN allergies, it is not universally effective. PURPOSE: This study aimed to investigate the potential of Gynostemma pentaphyllum saponins (GpS) as a novel therapeutic agent for PN allergy through modulation of gut microbiota, addressing the limitations of current treatments. METHODS: To elucidate the role of GpS on peanut allergy, we first built a PN-sensitized C57BL/6J model mice. Through comprehensive sequencing analysis, we identified Parabacteroides distasonis as a key bacterium triggering PN sensitization. Employing the same mouse model, GpS was evaluated for its effects on anaphylactic symptoms, serum immunoglobulin levels, and allergy-related biomarkers. 16S rRNA sequencing and transcriptomic analysis were applied to investigate the impact of GpS on the host's gut epithelium and microbiome. RESULTS: GpS treatment effectively reduced anaphylactic symptoms in PN-sensitized mice, as shown by decreased IgG1, total IgE, and PN-specific IgE levels. It also modulated the immune response by suppressing proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, IFN-γ, IL-21) and chemokines (CCL5, CCL12, CCL17, CCL22), while enhancing anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-4, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13). Fecal microbial transplant from GpS-treated Model mice to PN-sensitized mice displayed anti-peanut allergy effects. Additionally, the administration of GpS-enhanced bacteria (Clostridium aldenese or Lactobacillus murinus), alleviated anaphylactic symptoms and reduced serum allergy markers in PN-sensitized mice. CONCLUSION: To conclude, we revealed the intestinal environment, signaling molecules, mucosal cytokines, and commensal microbial profiles in the peanut-sensitized mouse model. We further presented evidence for the protective effect of GpS against PN allergen sensitization by downregulating a series of food-allergy-associated biomarkers and cytokines via the modulation of gut bacteria. More importantly, supported by both in vitro and in vivo experiments, we demonstrated that the protective effect of GpS against PN-allergy is through the enhancement of two commensal bacteria, Clostridium aldenese, and Lactobacillus murinus.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic condition characterized by recurrent episodes and an unclear etiology. Given the limitations of current therapeutic options, which include suboptimal efficacy and significant side effects, there is a pressing need to explore novel treatments. Probiotics derived from diverse species have been identified as a promising approach for managing IBD, owing to their anti-inflammatory properties and their ability to regulate gut flora, among other beneficial effects. METHODS: In this study, three strains of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) were isolated from the feces of the scavenger spotted hyena (Crocuta crocuta), a scavenging mammal. Based on their capability to survive within and adhere to the gastrointestinal tract, along with their profile of antibiotic resistance, a high-quality strain of Lactobacillus acidophilus (LA) was selected and demonstrated to be safe for mice. Subsequently, the therapeutic efficacy of LA was evaluated using a dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced model of ulcerative colitis in mice. RESULTS: The results indicated that LA restored the disease activity index and improved histopathological lesions in the model group. It also reduced inflammation and oxidative stress and significantly restored the expression of mucins and intestinal tight junction (TJ) proteins (ZO-1, Occludin). Furthermore, LA corrected the DSS-induced disruption of the intestinal flora, leading to a significant decrease in the prevalence of potentially harmful bacterial genera, such as Bacteroides, and an increase in beneficial bacterial genera, including Lactobacillus. In conclusion, Lactobacillus acidophilus LA1, isolated from spotted hyena feces, has potential as a functional supplement for alleviating symptoms of IBD and regulating intestinal flora.

This review explores the evolving role of dietitians in obesity management, advocating for a shift from a weight-centric approach to a more holistic model that prioritizes overall health gains. Key areas of interest include dietetic interventions' impact on metabolic health, cardiovascular function, gut microbiome balance, inflammation, and psychological well-being. RESULTS: Dietetic interventions have been shown to provide significant health improvements beyond weight loss. These include enhanced metabolic and cardiovascular health, better gut microbiome balance, reduced inflammation, improved sleep quality, mental well-being, and overall quality of life. By focusing on non-scale victories such as improved insulin sensitivity, lipid profiles, and mental health, dietitians play a crucial role in driving long-term success in obesity management. These outcomes highlight the need to shift the focus from short-term weight loss to a more comprehensive view of health gains. CONCLUSIONS: The role of dietitians in obesity management is expanding to encompass a more comprehensive and individualized approach. Moving beyond a focus on weight reduction, this paradigm promotes long-term, patient-centered strategies that address the multifactorial nature of obesity. By combining dietary changes with regular physical activity and behavioral support, dietitians can contribute to sustained health improvements, treating obesity as a chronic, complex disease.

Secondary analysis of ARDS patients enrolled in the Acute Lung Injury Registry and Biospecimen Repository at the University of Pittsburgh between June 2012 and September 2021. Patients were categorized into two mutually exclusive groups by the prevalence of COPD or emphysema at the time of ARDS diagnosis. The COPD/emphysema group comprised ARDS patients with radiological evidence of emphysema, chart diagnosis of COPD, or both. Demographics, lung mechanics, and clinical outcomes were obtained from the electronic medical record. Host-response biomarkers known to have validated associations with ARDS were previously measured in plasma and lower respiratory tract samples using a customized Luminex assay. Continuous and categorical variables were compared between groups with and without COPD/emphysema. RESULTS: 217 patients with ARDS were included in the study, 57 (27%) had COPD/emphysema. Patients with COPD/emphysema were older (median 62 [interquartile range 55-69] versus 53 [41-64] years, p < 0.01), more likely to be male (62% vs. 44%, p = 0.02) and had a higher prevalence of congestive heart failure (25% vs. 4%, p < 0.01) compared to patients without COPD/emphysema. Baseline demographics, laboratory parameters, and mechanical ventilatory characteristics were otherwise similar between the two groups. No difference in 90-day mortality was observed between groups; however, patients with COPD/emphysema had shorter duration of intensive care unit (ICU) stay (median 10 [7-18] versus 16 [9-28] days, p = 0.04) and shorter duration of mechanical ventilation (median 7 [4-16] vs. 12 [6-20] days, p = 0.01). Host response biomarkers in serum and lower respiratory tract samples did not significantly differ between groups. CONCLUSION: ARDS patients with COPD or emphysema had similar respiratory mechanics, host response biomarker profiles, and mortality compared to those without COPD or emphysema but with a shorter median duration of mechanical ventilation and ICU length of stay. Future studies should address differences in clinical and biological responses by disease severity, and should investigate the impact of severity of COPD and emphysema on mechanical ventilation and targeted therapeutic strategies in ARDS. CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

Discrimination is a recognized psychosocial stressor that has been linked to various negative health outcomes. This study explored the impact of discrimination on gut health, specifically focusing on microbiome changes, predicted metagenomic differences, transcriptomic profiles, and the potential for using a multi-omic approach to predict discrimination to identify discrimination status for an individual. Methods: We conducted a comprehensive investigation involving male and premenopausal female participants, using the Everyday Discrimination Scale to classify them into either high or low discrimination. Multiple questionnaires were administered to evaluate participants' physiological, psychological, and perceived stressors. Two diet questionnaires were also administered. Stool samples were collected for microbiome analysis and RNA sequencing. Microbial composition changes were analyzed using the Shannon index and Chao1 richness estimator for alpha diversity and the Aitchison distance metric for beta diversity. Differential abundance was evaluated using MaAsLin2, followed by metatranscriptomics sequencing and annotation. A multi-omic approach utilizing random forest was used to assess the predictability of discrimination. RESULTS: The study results showed that high discrimination was linked to higher gut microbiome species richness (Chao1, p = 0.02) and significant beta diversity differences (p = 0.04). Prevotella and Ruminococcaceae were both less abundant in the high discrimination group. High discrimination participants also reported higher levels of depression, anxiety, perceived stress, early life adversity, visceral sensitivity, and neuroticism than those in the low discrimination group. Gene expression analysis revealed distinctive patterns, with significant changes in genes associated with environmental sensing (two-component system) and metabolic pathways. In a plot comparing gene transcription to DNA content, certain genes showed higher expression levels in participants who experienced both high and low levels of discrimination. Our random forest classifier demonstrated the capability to accurately differentiate individuals with high and low discrimination in our training cohort (AUC = 0.91). CONCLUSION: These findings illuminate the substantial impact of discrimination on gut health, encompassing microbiome composition, gene expression, and functional pathways. These findings suggest that discrimination is associated with internal biological changes that can be associated with negative health outcomes, opening research to examine novel pathways that can be used to mitigate the negative health effects of discrimination.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) asscociated hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is becoming a growing concern in global healthcare. The early-life gut microbiota plays a crucial role in maintaining healthy. However, the impact of early-life gut microbiota dysbiosis on the advancement of MASLD-HCC remains inadequately understood. METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the role of early-life gut microbiota in the development of MASLD-HCC in streptozotocin and high-fat diet (STZ-HFD) induced mouse model. We recorded the body weight and lifespan, and dynamically monitored the level of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), triglyceride (TG), total cholesterol (T-CHO) and blood glucose in the serum monthly. In addition, we examined various immune cells present in the liver, such as T cells, B cells, NK cells, NKT cells, αβT cells, γδT cells, macrophage and MDSC cells by flow cytometry and conducted liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) based analysis on liver tissue from control and early-life antibiotic exposure mice (early-Abx) MASLD-HCC mice. RESULTS: We found that early-Abx mice suffered from more severe tumor burden and further confirmed that hepatocytes and immune cells were all disturbed. Importantly, early-life antibiotic exposure alters the liver metabolic profiling especially glycerophospholipids and lipid accumulation. Furthermore, mice exposed to antibiotics in early-life showed disturbances in glucose metabolism and developed insulin resistance. CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our findings revealed that early-life antibiotic exposure accelerated the progression of MASLD-HCC by impairing the hepatocytes, immune homeostasis and metabolites persistently, highlighting the importance of the early-life microbiota in the development of MASLD-HCC.

In this study, 12 CTEPH fresh thrombi and 12 organized thrombi were collected from 14 patients with CTEPH. Metagenomic sequencing was employed to explore the genomic information of all microorganisms in the thrombus samples. RESULTS: Our data demonstrated a diverse range of microorganisms in CTEPH thrombi, whether fresh or organized. Notably, a considerable proportion (54.7 %) of sequencing data could not be classified into the relative microbial taxa, highlighting the complexity and novelty of the thrombus ecosystem. Although there were no significant differences in microbial community structure between the two groups, the abundance of dominant microbial species varied. Leuconostoc sp. DORA 2, Staphylococcus aureus, and Aliidongia dinghuensis were common dominant species in CTEPH thrombus. Organized thrombus significantly increased the relative abundance of Staphylococcus aureus, which was confirmed to effectively distinguish between organized and fresh thrombi by LeFSe analysis and random forest analysis. Functional annotation using both the KEGG and eggNOG databases revealed that organized thrombi exhibit stronger metabolic functions, particularly in amino acid metabolism. CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that microbial composition and function may play an important role in thrombus organization. Targeting inflammation to prevent thrombosis presents promising opportunities for further research in this area.

Oral lichen planus (OLP) is a chronic oral mucosal inflammatory disease with a risk of becoming malignant. Emerging evidence suggests that microbial imbalance plays an important role in the development of OLP. However, the association between the oral microbiota and the metabolic features in OLP is still unclear. METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing and metabolomics profiling on 95 OLP patients and 105 healthy controls (HC).To study oral microbes and metabolic changes in OLP, we applied differential analysis, Spearman correlation analysis and four machine learning algoeithms. RESULTS: The alpha and beta diversity both differed between OLP and HC. After adjustment for gender and age, we found an increase in the relative abundance of Pseudomonas, Aggregatibacter, Campylobacter, and Lautropia in OLP, while 18 genera decreased in OLP. A total of 153 saliva metabolites distinguishing OLP from HC were identified. Notably, correlations were found between Oribacterium, specific lipid and amino acid metabolites, and OLP's clinical phenotype. Additionally, the combination of Pseudomonas, Rhodococcus and (±)10-HDoHE effectively distinguished OLP from HC. CONCLUSIONS: Based on multi-omics data, this study provides comprehensive evidence of a novel interplay between oral microbiome and metabolome in OLP pathogenesis using the oral microbiota and metabolites of OLP patients.

Ticks are vectors of numerous pathogens, with their bacterial composition, abundance, diversity, and interaction influencing both their growth and disease transmission efficiency. Despite the abundance of ticks in Inner Mongolia, China, comprehensive data on their microbial communities are lacking. This study aims to analyze the microbial communities within ticks from Inner Mongolia to inform innovative control strategies for interrupting pathogen transmission. METHODS: Tick samples were collected from animals and vegetation in multiple locations across Inner Mongolia and stored at - 80 °C. Ticks were identified using morphological keys and molecular biology methods. Full-length 16S rRNA gene sequencing was performed on collected samples. Bacterial community composition and diversity were mainly analyzed using bioinformatic tools such as QIIME, phyloseq, and DESeq2. Alpha diversity was assessed using Chao1, ACE, and Shannon indices, while beta diversity was evaluated using Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrices. LEfSe analysis was applied to identify taxa associated with ecological and biological variables. RESULTS: A total of 5,048,137 high-quality read counts were obtained, forming an average of 789.3 OTUs per sample. Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes were the most dominant phyla. Bacterial community composition varied significantly with geography, with Dermacentor nuttalli showing a higher abundance of Rickettsia in Xilingol League, while other regions had different dominant genera. The microbial community also differed based on the feeding status of ticks. Additionally, the microbiota of engorged ticks showed organ specificity. Pathogen detection efforts revealed the presence of nine pathogens across all three tick species. D. nuttalli was found to carry a significantly higher burden of pathogenic bacteria, making it the most potentially threatening tick species in Inner Mongolia. CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights significant variations in tick microbiomes influenced by geographic location, feeding status, and tick species. It underscores the importance of enhancing tick and tick-borne disease surveillance in Inner Mongolia for early detection and control of emerging pathogens.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) increases the risk of colorectal cancer, and it has the potential to diminish the quality of life. Clinical and experimental evidence demonstrate protective aspects of parasitic helminth infection against IBD. However, studies on the inhibition of inflammation by helminth infection have overlooked a key determinant of health: the gut microbiota. Although infection with helminths induces alterations in the host microbiota composition, the potential influence and mechanism of helminth infections induced changes in the gut microbiota on the development of IBD has not yet been elucidated. In this study, we analyzed the intersection of helminth Trichinella spiralis and gut bacteria in the regulation of colitis and related mechanisms. METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: T. spiralis infected mice were treated with antibiotics or cohoused with wild type mice, then challenged with dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-colitis and disease severity, immune responses and goblet cells assessed. Gut bacteria composition was assessed by 16S rRNA sequencing and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were measured. We found that protection against disease by infection with T. spiralis was abrogated by antibiotic treatment, and cohousing with T. spiralis- infected mice suppressed DSS-colitis in wild type mice. Bacterial community profiling revealed an increase in the abundance of the bacterial genus Muribaculum and unclassified_Muribaculaceae in mice with T. spiralis infection or mice cohoused with T. spiralis- infected mice. Metabolomic analysis demonstrated significantly increased propionic acid in feces from T. spiralis- infected mice. Data also showed that the gut microbiome modulated by T. spiralis exhibited enhanced goblet cell differentiation and elevated IL-10 levels in mice. CONCLUSIONS: These findings identify the gut microbiome as a critical component of the anti- colitic effect of T. spiralis and gives beneficial insights into the processes by which helminth alleviates colitis.

Functional dyspepsia (FD) is a multifactorial disorder as its development may be based on several different pathophysiological mechanisms. Interaction of gut microbiome with the host has been proposed as a potential mechanism involved in the disease's pathogenesis. AIM/METHODS: We aimed to characterize microbiome profiling on duodenal luminal content (DLC) of FD patients and compare it to that of controls (CG) and patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). Outpatients fulfilling Rome IV criteria for FD, IBS, and control group (CG) underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and 2 cc of duodenal aspirate (3rd - 4th part) was aspirated in sterile traps. Duodenal microbiome was assessed after DNA extraction and 16S gene-based sequencing on Oxford Nanopore MinION followed by EPI2ME analysis (ONT/Metrich-ore Ltd). Bioanalysis of the microbiome (alpha-, beta-diversity, comparisons of relative abundances for all taxonomic ranks) was implemented in Python. Multiple group means comparisons were performed with one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) and Kruskal-Wallis test with Tuckey's and Dunn's post hoc tests respectively, in case of significance (P-value <0.05). RESULTS: 20 subjects with FD (8 females; age 49.9 ± 13.5 yrs.), 20 with IBS (14 females; age 57.6 ± 14.8 yrs.) and 10 CG (6 females; age 49.2 ± 13.8 yrs.) had their DLC analyzed. The α-diversity index of subjects with FD was significantly lower compared to controls (Shannon's index, p = 0.0218) and similar to that of patients with IBS. Principal Coordinate Analysis (PCoA) generated from species relative abundances (beta-diversity) showed no difference in the DLC profile of subjects with FD and IBS when compared to controls (p = 0.513). Compared to controls, the relative abundance (RA) of Chloroflexota phylum was lower in subjects with FD (p = 0.017) and IBS (p = 0.026), respectively. Additionally, the RA of the Rhodothermota and Thermotogota phyla was lower in FD (p = 0.017 and p = 0.018, respectively) but not in IBS patients (p = 0.15 and p = 0.06, respectively) compared to controls. Interestingly, the RA of specific taxa from Chloroflexota, Rhodothermota and Thermotogota phyla were consistently lower in subjects with FD when compared to CG but similar to IBS, during analysis of all the subsequent major ranks of taxonomy. At the class level, there were significant differences in Syntrophobacteria, Acidithiobacillia, Cytophagia and Flavobacteriia between the FD and CG groups (p < 0.05), but no such difference between FD and IBS was found. Finally, multiple significant differences at the order, family, genus and species level between the FD and CG groups were also detected. A positive relationship between the RA of Streptococcus and those from genus Granulicatella was observed both in FD (p = 0.014) and IBS (p = 0.014) patients. CONCLUSION & INFERENCES: The microbiome profiling from duodenal luminal content of FD patients is significantly different to that of controls, including lower microflora diversity, different microflora structure/composition and specific taxa. Similar differences in the DLC between FD and IBS patients were not evident.

This study incorporated fecal metagenomic data from 10 independent cohorts from 7 countries and an additional in-house cohort, totaling 2101 metagenomes (748 CRC, 471 adenoma, and 882 healthy controls (HC)). Taxonomic profiling was performed using Kraken2 against the Genome Taxonomy Database. Alterations of archaeal communities and their interactions with bacteria and methanogenic functions were analyzed. Random Forest model was used to identify multicohort diagnostic microbial biomarkers in CRC. RESULTS: The overall archaeal alpha diversity shifted from HC, adenoma patients to CRC patients with Methanobacteriota phylum enriched while order Methanomassiliicoccales depleted. At the species level, Methanobrevibacter_A smithii and Methanobrevibacter_A sp002496065 were enriched, while 8 species, including Methanosphaera stadtmanae and Methanomassiliicoccus_A intestinalis, were depleted in CRC patients across multiple cohorts. Among them, M. stadmanae, Methanobrevibacter_A sp900314695 and Methanocorpusculum sp001940805 exhibited a progressive decrease in the HC-adenoma-CRC sequence. CRC-depleted methanogenic archaea exhibited enhanced co-occurring interactions with butyrate-producing bacteria. Consistently, methanogenesis-related genes and pathways were enriched in CRC patients. A model incorporating archaeal and bacterial biomarkers outperformed single-kingdom models in discriminating CRC patients from healthy individuals with AUC ranging from 0.744 to 0.931 in leave-one-cohort-out analysis. CONCLUSIONS: This multicohort analysis uncovered significant alterations in gut archaea and their interactions with bacteria in healthy individuals, adenoma patients and CRC patients. Archaeal biomarkers, combined with bacterial features, have potential as non-invasive diagnostic biomarkers for CRC.

Chronic heart failure (HF) patients have reduced microbiota diversity. Leakage of microbes and their metabolites into the bloodstream may activate neutrophils. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) consist of chromatin and proteases, and may contribute to HF pathogenesis. We assessed associations between circulating NETs and 1) cardiac function, 2) the degree of gut microbiota diversity and 3) gut leakage and microbial metabolites in HF patients. METHODS: A cross-sectional study including 124 patients with chronic HF and left ventricular ejection fraction ≤40 %. Severe HF was defined as N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide concentrations above median. We measured citrullinated histone H3 (CitH3), myeloperoxidase- and double-stranded-DNA in the blood. Gut leakage markers included bacterial lipopolysaccharides and soluble cluster of differentiation 14. The microbial metabolites included circulating trimethylamine N-oxide and butyrate producing capacity. We used the Shannon diversity-index and a dysbiosis-index based on bacteria with altered relative abundance to characterize the gut microbiota profile. RESULTS: Quartile 4 of CitH3 was associated with more severe HF compared to quartiles 1-3, after adjustments for age, gender and hypertension (adjusted odds ratio [95 %CI] 3.21[1.18-8.69], p = 0.022). CitH3 was moderately associated with hypertension (p = 0.04), higher CRP levels (p = 0.016) and lower Shannon diversity index, (p = 0.039). No other NET marker associated with severe HF. CONCLUSIONS: In chronic HF patients with reduced LVEF, high levels of CitH3 were associated with disease severity, inflammation and reduced gut microbiota diversity. Our results suggest that enhanced release of NETs could be involved in progressive HF, although the contribution of the gut microbiota seems limited in this context.

C57BL/6J mice were fed a high-fat/high-cholesterol diet (HFD) to induce MASLD. Upon the establishment of MASLD, valine was supplemented via voluntary oral administration. Clinical and biochemical parameters associated with MASLD were measured, and molecular mechanism and gut microbiota modulation from the effect of valine were investigated. RESULTS: Low-dose valine was found to attenuate the progression of MASLD, significantly reducing the gain in body weight, liver weight, and epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT) weight, while also attenuating hyperglycemia and hyperleptinemia, and improving serum lipid profiles. Mechanistically, in the liver, genes related to hepatic lipogenesis and cholesterol biosynthesis were downregulated, while those associated with fatty acid oxidation, autophagy, and antioxidant capacity were upregulated, and AMPK pathway activity was enhanced. Liver and hypothalamic leptin resistance and inflammation were also attenuated, allowing better appetite control in mice fed a HFD and leading to reduced food intake. Additionally, metabolic flexibility in the eWAT was improved, and the gut microbiome was modulated by low-dose valine supplementation. CONCLUSION: Low-dose valine supplementation attenuates MASLD by enhancing systemic leptin sensitivity and modulating the gut microbiome.

Dichloroacetate (DCA), a pan-pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitor, ameliorates multiple pathological conditions and tissue injury and shows strong potential for clinical applications. Here, we investigated the preventive effects of DCA in a murine model of alcohol-associated liver disease. METHODS: C57BL/6J mice were subjected to the acute-on-chronic model of alcohol-associated liver disease and treated with DCA. Livers were assessed in liver histology, biochemistry, and gene expression. Mass spectrometry was used to compare protein expression and metabolite levels. RESULTS: DCA inhibited hepatic expression of inflammatory genes but did not prevent steatosis and hepatocellular injury in ethanol-fed mice. Consistently, DCA repressed the expression of mRNAs for inflammatory genes in LPS-stimulated murine bone-marrow-derived macrophages and human monocytic THP-1 cells and inhibited both gene expression and protein release of interleukin-1 beta. DCA prevented hepatic accumulation of isovaleric acid in ethanol-fed mice, a short-chain fatty acid primarily produced by gut microbiota. In vitro, isovaleric acid potentiated LPS's effects, while DCA prevented this proinflammatory action. Ethanol feeding increased the expression of proteins involved in diverse metabolic pathways, including branched-chain amino acid (BCAA) degradation. In ethanol-fed mice, hepatic Fischer's ratio (the molar ratio of BCAAs to aromatic amino acids Phe and Tyr) and BTR (the molar ratio of BCAAs to Tyr) showed a decrease compared to pair-fed mice; however, this decrease was not observed in DCA-treated ethanol-fed mice. DCA blunted the ethanol-induced increase of BCKDHA, the rate-limiting enzyme in BCAA catabolism, and cytochrome P450 2E1. CONCLUSIONS: Ethanol-induced hepatic inflammatory responses and metabolic disturbances were prevented by DCA in mice, indicating the potential to develop pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase inhibitors as an effective therapy to treat alcohol-associated liver disease.

In this study, we propose a framework to enhance the visualization of repeated measures microbiome data using Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA) adjusted for covariates through linear mixed models (LMM). Our method adjusts for confounding variables and accounts for the repeated measures structure of the data, enabling clearer identification of microbial community variations across time points or clusters. RESULTS: We demonstrate the utility of our approach through simulated scenarios and real datasets, showing that it effectively mitigates the influence of nuisance covariates and highlights key axes of microbiome variation. DISCUSSION: This refined visualization technique provides a robust tool for researchers to explore and understand microbial community dynamics in repeated measures microbiome studies.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is a growing health concern and the risk of its development is connected with the increasing prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MetS) which occurs as a result of some complex obesity-induced metabolic changes. It is a common chronic liver disease characterized by excessive fat accumulation in the liver, the tendency to progress to more severe forms, and a corresponding increase in morbidity and mortality. Thus, effectively addressing the rising burden of the disease requires a thorough understanding of its complex interrelationship with obesity and MetS. MAIN BODY: MASLD results from complex interactions involving obesity, insulin resistance, and dyslipidaemia, leading to hepatic lipid accumulation, and is influenced by several genetic and environmental factors such as diet and gut microbiota dysbiosis. It has extensive metabolic and non-metabolic implications, including links to MetS components like hyperglycaemia, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia, and progresses to significant liver damage and other extra-hepatic risks like cardiovascular disease and certain cancers. Diagnosis often relies on imaging and histology, with non-invasive methods preferred over liver biopsies. Emerging biomarkers and OMIC technologies offer improved diagnostic capabilities but face practical challenges. Advancements in artificial intelligence (AI), lifestyle interventions, and pharmacological treatments show promise, with future efforts focusing on precision medicine and novel diagnostic tools to improve patient outcome. CONCLUSION: Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the development of MASLD within the context of metabolic syndrome (MetS) is essential for identifying potential therapeutic targets. Advancements in non-invasive diagnostic tools and novel pharmacological treatments, hold promise for improving the management of MASLD. Future research should focus on precision medicine and innovative therapies to effectively address the disease and its consequences.

Whole-plant corn silage (WPCS) is an important roughage source for livestock, and have critical influences on rumen or intestinal microbiota, thus affecting the growth performance and feed efficiency. Our previous studies showed that adding WPCS to the diet of Hezuo pigs could promote the growth and fiber digestibility. While the aim of this study is to understand the effect of dietary WPCS on the colonic microflora in Hezuo pigs, which is essential for improving the roughage exploitation of pigs. METHODS: Thirty-two Hezuo pigs with similar body weight (7.88 ± 0.81) kg were selected and randomly divided into four groups with eight pigs in each group. Pigs in the control group were fed a basal diet, pigs in the experimental groups (Groups I, II, and III) were fed basal diet supplemented with 5%, 10%, and 15% WPCS, respectively, under 120 d experimental period. Six pigs from each group were picked for collecting colonic contents samples. 16S rRNA sequencing was performed to analyze the colonic microbiota of experimental pigs. RESULTS: The results showed that community richness indexes Chao1 and Observed_species in group III of Hezuo pig were significantly lower than that of the other three groups, community diversity indexes Shannon and Simpson were significantly higher in group I and II in comparison to the control group, and significantly lower in group III in comparison to the control group, group I and II. Adding WPCS to the diet of Hezuo pigs has no influence on the colonic dominant phylum, Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and Rikenellaceae RC9 gut group were most prevalent in the colon of Hezuo pig. When compared with the control group, the relative abundance of Streptococcus was significantly decreased in three experimental groups, while p-251-o5, Parabacteroides, Prevotellaceae UCG-003, Prevotellaceae UCG-001, and F082 exhibited significantly higher relative abundances in at least two experimental groups. Fibrobacter, Rikenellaceae RC9 gut group in group I, UCG-010 in group II, Bacteroides in group III exhibited increased relative abundance as compared with the control group. PICRUSt functional annotation indicated that the functions of cellular process and signaling were significantly increased in all WPCS-rationed groups, cancers, nervous system, immune system and environmental adaptation were all differed from groups I and II; three predominant pathways of translation, nucleotide metabolism and signal were only differed from the group II. CONCLUSIONS: Feeding with 5% and 10% WPCS for Hezuo pigs could improve their colonic microflora diversity, and increase the relative abundance of fiber-digesting bacteria, which may potentially help to improve the fibre digestibility of Hezuo pigs by regulating the microbial function of cellular process and signaling, nucleotide metabolism, translation.

A prospective, longitudinal, observational study was conducted in patients receiving myelosuppressive CT for a solid tumor or lymphoma. Oral rinsing samples were retrieved before, during and after the start of CT, but also when OM or FN was present. The samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing and statistical analysis was performed using alpha (Shannon) and beta (PERMANOVA) diversity analyses. Furthermore, differential abundances were analyzed using ALDEx2v1.32.0. Differences between groups were calculated using the Mann Whitney U-test, Kruskal-Wallis test and Wilcoxon Signed Rank using R. RESULTS: Forty-six patients, with a mean follow up of 114 days, were included for analysis and a total of 138 oral rinsing samples were available in the CLR-transformed data for PERMANOVA and 137 samples-for alpha diversity calculation. Significant changes in alpha diversity were seen when OM or FN was present. Moreover, significant changes were seen in beta diversity during the course of the CT treatment and when OM was present. Genera showing substantial changes in relative abundance were Streptococcus during the course of CT treatment and Prevotella, Fusobacterium, Selenomonas, Actinomyces and Leptotrichia when OM was present. CONCLUSION: Changes in the oral microbiome were observed during the CT-regimen and when OM was present. Furthermore, changes of the oral microbiota during FN episodes were observed; however, larger studies should be performed to substantiate our results.

The aim of this study was to explore the microbial variations and biomarkers in the oral environment of patients with persistent pulmonary nodules (pPNs) and to reveal the potential biological functions of the salivary microbiota in pPNs. MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study included a total of 483 participants (141 healthy controls and 342 patients with pPNs) from June 2022 and January 2024. Saliva samples were subjected to sequencing of the V3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene to assess microbial diversity and differential abundance. Seven advanced machine learning algorithms (logistic regression, support vector machine, multi-layer perceptron, naïve Bayes, random forest, gradient boosting decision tree, and LightGBM) were utilized to evaluate performance and identify key microorganisms, with fivefold cross-validation employed to ensure robustness. The Shapley Additive exPlanations (SHAP) algorithm was employed to explain the contribution of these core microbiotas to the predictive model. Additionally, the PICRUSt2 algorithm was used to predict the microbial functions. RESULTS: The salivary microbial composition in pPNs group showed significantly lower α- and β-diversity compared to healthy controls. A high-accuracy LightGBM model was developed, identifying six core genera-Fusobacterium, Solobacterium, Actinomyces, Porphyromonas, Atopobium, and Peptostreptococcus-as pPNs biomarkers. Additionally, a visualization pPNs risk prediction system was developed. The immune responses and metabolic activities differences in salivary microbiota between the patients with pPNs and healthy controls were revealed. CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the potential clinical applications of the salivary microbiota for enable earlier detection and targeted interventions, offering significant promise for advancing clinical management and improving patient outcomes in pPNs.

Alcohol drinking and gut microbiota are related to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the specific relationship between them remains unclear. AIMS: We aimed to establish the alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis and develop machine learning (ML) models in predicting the occurrence of early-stage HCC. METHODS: Two hundred sixty-nine patients with early-stage HCC and 278 controls were recruited. Alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis was established through the mediation/moderation effect analyses. Eight ML algorithms including Classification and Regression Tree (CART), Gradient Boosting Machine (GBM), K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN), Logistic Regression (LR), Neural Network (NN), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM), and eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) were applied. RESULTS: A total of 160 pairs of individuals were included for analyses. The mediation effects of Genus_Catenibacterium (P = 0.024), Genus_Tyzzerella_4 (P < 0.001), and Species_Tyzzerella_4 (P = 0.020) were discovered. The moderation effects of Family_Enterococcaceae (OR = 0.741, 95%CI:0.160-0.760, P = 0.017), Family_Leuconostocaceae (OR = 0.793, 95%CI:0.486-3.593, P = 0.010), Genus_Enterococcus (OR = 0.744, 95%CI:0.161-0.753, P = 0.017), Genus_Erysipelatoclostridium (OR = 0.693, 95%CI:0.062-0.672, P = 0.032), Genus_Lactobacillus (OR = 0.655, 95%CI:0.098-0.749, P = 0.011), Species_Enterococcus_faecium (OR = 0.692, 95%CI:0.061-0.673, P = 0.013), and Species_Lactobacillus (OR = 0.653, 95%CI:0.086-0.765, P = 0.014) were uncovered. The predictive power of eight ML models was satisfactory (AUCs:0.855-0.932). The XGBoost model had the best predictive ability (AUC = 0.932). CONCLUSIONS: ML models based on the alcohol drinking-gut microbiota-liver axis are valuable in predicting the occurrence of early-stage HCC.

A total of 151 Uygur and Han women, with and without HPV, were studied at Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region People's Hospital (June 2021-June 2022). These participants were divided into six groups: Uygur control (CV), Uygur transient infection (TPV), Uygur persistent infection (PPV), Han control (CH), Han transient infection (TPH), Han persistent infection (PPH). Vaginal microbiota diversity and dominant bacteria with or without HPV infection were compared using 16S rDNA sequencing. RESULTS: After HPV infection, vaginal pH increased significantly in Uygur and Han women. Vaginal environment cleanliness decreased notably only in Han women (P < 0.05). In Han women, Lactobacillus and Gardnerella dominated both with or without HPV infection. Prevotella, Streptococcus, and Atopobium decreased, while Sneathia increased significantly in persistent HPV cases. Among Uygur women, Gardnerella, Streptococcus, Prevotella, and Shuttleworthia increased significantly in the TPV group, with lower Lactobacillus compared to CV and PPV groups. Bacterial diversity indices (Chao1, Shannon, Simpson) were significantly lower in TPH compared to CH (P < 0.05), with no significant difference in PPH compared to CH (P > 0.05). Chao1 index was significantly lower in TPH than TPV (P < 0.05), with no difference between PPH and PPV (P > 0.05). CV group's Chao1 index was significantly lower than CH (P < 0.01). PCoA and NMDS analyses showed distinct vaginal microbiota between TPH and TPV groups. LEfSe identified 20 differentially expressed taxa in CH-TPH-PPH comparison and 17 in CV-TPV-PPV. CONCLUSION: Our study reveals ethnic-specific differences in vaginal microbial responses to HPV infection, with notable alterations in diversity and composition. The differential patterns observed between Uygur and Han women underscore the importance of considering host ethnicity in HPV-related microbial dysbiosis, emphasizing the need for tailored interventions targeting microbial signatures to enhance HPV prevention and management strategies.

Colorectal cancer (CRC), with a growing incidence trend, is one of the most diagnosed cancers and the second cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. The literature has frequently focused attention on the correlation between the gut microbiota imbalance and CRC. The genera Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium have recently received increasing attention because of their potential in restoring alterations in the gut microflora. Therefore, this study aimed to quantitatively evaluate the presence of lactobacilli and bifidobacterial strains in the fecal samples of CRC patients compared to healthy volunteers. METHODS: From 2018 to 2019, 25 confirmed CRC patients and 25 age- and gender-matched control subjects were enrolled in the study. Bacterial DNA was extracted from the fecal samples and the presence of lactobacilli and bifidobacterial strains were quantitatively determined using quantitative real-time PCR using genus-specific 16S rDNA primers. RESULTS: A significant decline in the abundance of bifidobacteria in CRC patients compared to healthy individuals (p value<0.003) was observed; however, no significant difference was observed between the two groups regarding the abundance of lactobacilli (p value<0.163). Correlation analysis showed a positive association between the lack of genetic history of CRC and the numbers of gut bifidobacteria and lactobacilli. CONCLUSION: As a putative gut probiotic, depletion of bifidobacteria showed significant correlation to the development and progression of CRC; therefore, therapeutic use of these probiotic bacteria could be considered a possible adjuvant approach in disease management through modulation of the microbiota.

Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging remain unknown. METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites. RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging. CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential therapeutic targets.

Dietary habits are crucial for preventing many diseases, particularly in children and adolescents. Accurate assessment of dietary intake is essential for understanding the relationship between diet and health in these age groups. OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to evaluate the reproducibility and validity of a Spanish version of the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC) Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) in 150 Spanish children and adolescents aged 10 to 17 using the average of 9 days of 24-h dietary recall (24H-DR) as a reference. METHODS: Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) were calculated to asses reproducibility and Spearman/Pearson correlation coefficients were calculated to assess validity and reproducibility. RESULTS: The average ICCs were 0.41 for crude nutrients, 0.31 for food groups, 0.31 for energy-adjusted nutrients, and 0.4 for energy-adjusted food groups. Spearman/Pearson correlation coefficients averaged 0.39 and 0.41 for crude and energy-adjusted nutrients, respectively, and 0.51 and 0.47 for corresponding food groups. Regarding validity, the average correlation coefficient for crude, energy-adjusted, and de-attenuated nutrients was 0.32, 0.50, and 0.50, respectively. The highest crude coefficient was 0.50 for vitamin C and fiber, while the highest energy-adjusted coefficient was 0.76 for protein and carbohydrates. The highest de-attenuated coefficient was 0.72 for vitamin B6. CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results suggest that the EPIC FFQ is a valid and reliable instrument for assessing dietary intake in Spanish children and adolescents.

Proanthocyanidins (PACs) from black soybean seed coat have antioxidant and anti-tumorigenic properties. We investigated the anti-tumor properties and mechanisms of action of PACs on colorectal cancer (CRC). METHODS: We fed the APCmin/+ mice, which are highly susceptible to spontaneous intestinal adenoma formation, diets supplemented with or without PACs for 7 weeks and assessed adverse effects, the number and size of intestinal polyps, and the expression of pro- and anti-proliferative proteins in the intestine. The mouse gut microbiome composition was analyzed, and the concentrations of gut short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) were quantified. We also compared CRC incidence in Tamba in Japan, where black soybean is consumed frequently, with that in the rest of Japan. RESULTS: The number and size of intestinal polyps notably decreased in the PAC-fed mice. Compared with control mice, the PAC-fed mice showed lower expression of proliferation markers proliferating cell nuclear antigen and β catenin and a higher expression of the anti-inflammatory protein oligomeric mucus gel-forming. PAC supplementation increased the prevalence and concentrations of beneficial gut microbes and SCFAs, respectively. CONCLUSIONS: Diet supplemented with black soybean-derived PACs could prevent CRC development in mice through gut microbiome remodeling. Regions consuming black soybeans have low CRC incidence. Notably, the incidence of CRC, breast cancer, and liver cancer was significantly lower in Tamba than in the rest of Hyogo Prefecture or Japan. Future studies should delineate the mechanisms underlying the CRC-protective effects of PACs. Nevertheless, our results demonstrate the potential of including PACs in dietary recommendations for cancer prevention.

Metabolic dysfunction-associated liver disease (MASLD) and alcohol-associated liver disease (ALD) are among the leading causes of liver disease worldwide. The exact roles of epigenetic factors in both diseases remains largely unknown. In this context, liver DNA methylation remains a field that requires further exploration and understanding. METHODS: We performed a systematic review of liver DNA methylation in humans with MASLD or ALD using Ovid MEDLINE, Ovid Embase, and Cochrane Library. We included human studies where liver DNA methylation was assessed in patients with MASLD and/or ALD. The Rayyan platform was used to select studies. Risk of bias was assessed with the "risk of bias in non-randomized studies of interventions" tool, ROBINS-I. We performed pathway analysis using the most important differentially methylated genes selected in each article. RESULTS: Fifteen articles were included in this systematic review. The risk of bias was moderate to serious in all articles and bias due to confounding and patient selection was high. Sixteen common pathways, containing differentially methylated genes, including cancer pathways, were identified in both diseases. CONCLUSIONS: There are common pathways, containing differentially methylated genes, in ALD and MASLD, such as pathways in cancer and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) signaling pathways. In MASLD, the insulin signaling pathway is one of the most important, and in ALD, the MAPK signaling pathway is the most important. Our study adds one more piece to the puzzle of the mechanisms involved in steatotic liver disease.

Metabolic reprogramming (MR) in cancer (CA) has been a focus of intense research in the recent two decades. This phenomenon has attracted great interest because it offers potential targets for cancer therapy. To capture the intellectual landscape of this field, we conducted a bibliometric analysis to assess the scientific output, major contributors, and trends in the MR/CA research. METHODS: We performed a systematic search using the Web of Science to retrieve articles published on MR of cancer from 2006 until 2023. The bibliometric tools such as Biblioshiny, VOSviewer, and Microsoft Excel were used to identify the most prolific authors, institutions, citation patterns, and keywords. We also used co-citation analysis to map the conceptual structure of the field and identify influential publications. Furthermore, we examined the literature by analyzing publication years, citations, and research impact factors. RESULTS: A total of 4,465 publications about MR/CA were retrieved. Publications on MR/CA increased rapidly from 2006 to 2023. Frontiers in Oncology published the most papers, while Cell Metabolism had the most citations. Highly cited papers were mainly published in Cancer Cell, Nature, Cell, Science and Cell Metabolism. China and the United States led the way in publications and contributed the most to MR/CA research. The University of Texas System, Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Fudan University were the most productive institutions. The profitable authors were Deberardinis Ralph J and Chiarugi Paola. The current topics included MR in tumorigenesis and progression of CA, MR of tumor cells and tumor microenvironment, the effect of MR on the CA treatment, the underlying mechanisms of MR (such as gene regulation, epigenetics, extracellular vesicles, and gut microbiota), and the modulation of MR. Some topics such as tumor microenvironment, lipid MR, circular RNA, long noncoding RNA, exosome, prognostic model, and immunotherapy may be the focus of MR/CA research in the next few years. CONCLUSION: This study evaluated the global scientific output in the field of MR/CA research, analyzing its quantitative characteristics. It identified some significant and distinguished papers and compiled information regarding the current status and evolving trends of MR/CA research.

Vitamin B12 is essential for neurological function, red blood cell formation, and DNA synthesis. Deficiency can lead to diverse health conditions, including megaloblastic anemia and neurological issues. Oral supplementation is a standard treatment for B12 deficiency. The Sucrosomial® carrier system offers an innovative approach that enhances supplemental nutrient absorption and bioavailability. OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to compare the effectiveness of oral Sucrosomial® vitamin B12 formulation vs various conventional B12 supplements, randomly selected from local pharmacies, in increasing and maintaining circulatory B12 levels in healthy deficient adults (200-300 pg/mL). METHODS: A randomized, double-blind clinical trial was conducted across three centers in Pakistan from April to July 2024. At KEMU, participants received either Sucrosomial® vitamin B12 or Mecogen SL B12; at LRH, Sucrosomial® B12 or B-SUB B12; and at LUMHS, Sucrosomial® B12, Evermin B12, or Neuromax B12. Participants took a daily single dose of 1,000 μg of the assigned B12 formulation for 7 days. Serum B12 levels were measured at baseline (day 0) and on days 1, 3, 5, and 7. RESULTS: Sucrosomial® B12 was significantly more effective than conventional B12 formulations in increasing and maintaining higher serum B12 levels across all time points. At KEMU, it reached a peak concentration of 454 ± 3.9 pg/mL by day 5, compared to 274 ± 11.1 pg/mL with Mecogen SL B12. At LRH, it peaked at 496 ± 34.4 pg/mL by day 5 versus 304 ± 49.4 pg/mL for B-SUB B12. At LUMHS, it reached 592.7 ± 74.3 pg/mL by day 7, compared to 407.24 ± 41.6 pg/mL for Evermin B12 and 263.82 ± 23.8 pg/mL for Neuromax B12. Sucrosomial® B12 was the only formulation to surpass the deficiency-borderline threshold (200-300 pg/mL) within 24 h of the first dose and was well tolerated with no reported side effects. CONCLUSION: Sucrosomial® vitamin B12 demonstrated superior efficacy in rapidly and consistently elevating and maintaining higher circulatory B12 levels compared to conventional supplements. Its characteristic absorption mode and proven efficacy suggest it could effectively address B12 deficiency in a broad range of populations, including those with gastrointestinal conditions and pernicious anemia, thereby supporting overall health. CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov, NCT06376591.

The CAG model of SD rats was established by induction with 0.1% ammonia and 20 mmol/L sodium deoxycholate solution, accompanied with irregular fasting cycle. The efficacy of RUT in treating CAG was assessed through pathological examination and serum biochemical indices including PP, IL-6, MTL, TNF-α, PG I, SS, PG II, IL-10 and GAS-17. Following this, network pharmacology, 16s rRNA sequencing, transcriptomics, and broadly targeted metabolomics were conducted to unravel the underlying mechanisms of RUT's action in CAG treatment. Ultimately, molecular docking, western blotting, and immunohistochemistry were employed to validate the critical targets and pathways involved in RUT's therapeutic approach for CAG. RESULTS: RUT significantly improved body weight, gastric juice pH and gastric histologic injury in CAG rats. The results of serum biochemical indices showed that RUT significantly inhibited the expression levels of SS, GAS-17, IL-6 and TNF-α, and increased the levels of MTL, PP, PGI, PGII and IL-10. In addition, RUT apparently increased the expression of mucosal barrier proteins such as ZO-1, E-cadherin and claudin-4 and occludin. Network pharmacology in combination with transcriptomics revealed that the MAPK signaling pathway was the most important pathway for RUT treatment of CAG. Further analysis suggested that by regulating linoleic acid metabolism, metabolic pathways, etc. mainly related to energy metabolism, RUT intervention effectively ameliorated gastric tissue metabolic disorders in CAG rats. The 16S rRNA gene-based microbiota analysis revealed that RUT altered the composition of the intestinal microbiota and decreased the relative abundance of unclassified_Muribaculaceae. PICRUST analysis suggested that the differential bacteria may be involved in energy metabolism pathway regulation for the improvement of CAG. A comprehensive analysis of the transcriptome and metabolome showed that the RUT improved the differential metabolites through the regulation of TGER2, CBR1 and CTPS1 targets. CONCLUSION: These findings indicated that RUT's mechanism of action in treating CAG was related to modulating the gut microbiota, influencing energy metabolism, and inhibiting the MAPK signaling pathway. This provided new insights into how RUT exerts its therapeutic effects on CAG.

Disturbances in the gut microbiota may act as mechanisms influencing the interplay between dietary factors and metabolic disorders. Studies have demonstrated that these alterations are associated with the diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Within this context, we aimed to investigate associations between gut microbiota, gut-derived metabolites (short-chain fatty acids [SCFAs] and indole-3-propionic acid [IPA]), and dietary intake in women with PCOS. METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study of 24 women with PCOS, previously recruited for two studies at our research center, compared with 14 age-matched healthy controls. The mean (SD) age of all 38 participants was 33.3 (7.5) years, and the mean (SD) body mass index was 29.5 (4.8) kg/m2. Primary outcomes included gut microbiota analysis by sequencing the V4 region of the 16 S rRNA gene, serum IPA levels measured by liquid chromatography/triple-quadrupole mass spectrometry (LC-QqQ-MS), and fecal and plasma SCFA levels measured by LC-MS/MS. RESULTS: Gut microbiota diversity, composition, and metabolic pathways differed between the PCOS and control groups. A higher abundance of two operational taxonomic units specializing in complex carbohydrate metabolism was observed in healthy control women. The PCOS group exhibited a less favorable dietary intake than the control group, and a significant correlation was observed between gut microbiota composition and dietary glycemic load in PCOS (r = 0.314, P = 0.03 in Mantel test). Multivariable-adjusted linear regression models indicated that lower levels of IPA and higher circulating levels of two SCFAs (acetic acid and propionic acid) were independently associated with the diagnosis of PCOS. CONCLUSIONS: Our data support the differentiation between women with PCOS and healthy controls based on gut microbiota analysis. Furthermore, changes in gut bacteria and their metabolites could be, at least in part, the biological mechanism by which a low glycemic load diet may potentially improve PCOS-related reproductive and cardiometabolic outcomes.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is the most common human sarcoma with over 5000 new patients diagnosed in the USA each year. The tumor originates from the interstitial cells of Cajal and forms an intramural lesion most commonly in the stomach or small intestine. The gut microbiome has been linked to other gastrointestinal cancers and a recent paper purported that GISTs contain substantial intratumoral bacteria. The purpose of this study is to further evaluate the presence of bacteria in GISTs. PATIENTS AND METHODS: We collected 25 tumor samples of varying size and location from 24 patients under sterile conditions in the operating room immediately following surgical resection. 16S quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) gene amplicon sequencing were performed to evaluate the bacterial species present in each tumor. Retrospective chart review was performed to determine tumor characteristics, including tumor size, location, imatinib exposure, and mucosal involvement. RESULTS: In 23 of the 25 tumor samples, there were fewer than 100 copy numbers of 16S rRNA per uL, indicating an absence of a significant bacterial load. 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing of the remaining two samples, one gastric tumor and one duodenal tumor, revealed the presence of normal intestinal bacteria. These two tumors, along with three others, had disruption of the mucosal lining. CONCLUSIONS: GISTs generally lack substantial bacteria, except in some cases when the tumor disrupts the mucosa.

We used data from 177 patients enrolled in an observational ovarian cancer cohort study from October 2012 through September 2022. All patients underwent debulking surgery and completed an entire course of standard-of-care platinum-based chemotherapy. Follow-up was completed through May 2024. SVI was calculated using census tract at diagnosis. High NSV was defined as SVI in the top quartile of the cohort. Cox proportional hazard models assessed the association between NSV and progression-free (PFS) and overall (OS) survival. RESULTS: After accounting for demographic and clinical factors, high NSV was associated with significantly worse PFS (HR:2.31 [95% CI:1.48-3.61]; P < 0.001) and OS (HR:1.79 [95% CI:1.10-2.92]; P = 0.02), with neighborhood socioeconomic status associated with significantly worse PFS (HR:2.29 [95% CI:1.47-3.56]; P < 0.001) and OS (HR:1.71 [95% CI:1.04-2.80]; P = 0.03). Neighborhood housing type/transportation was also associated with significantly worse PFS (HR:1.65 [95% CI:1.07-2.55]; P = 0.02) and trended towards worse OS (HR:1.43 [95% CI: 0.80-2.33]). CONCLUSION AND RELEVANCE: Higher neighborhood social vulnerability is associated with worse outcomes among ovarian cancer patients. Validating these results in a population-based cohort and assessing programs to reduce neighborhood social vulnerability to improve ovarian cancer outcomes is warranted.

Irinotecan is a chemotherapeutic drug widely used to treat solid tumors. However, its effectiveness is limited by the severely delayed onset of diarrhea. This study aimed to confirm the protective effects of the non-systemic oral antibiotic rifaximin on irinotecan-induced mucositis in mice model. MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six to eight week-old BALB/c mice were treated with saline, irinotecan (50 mg/kg, i.p. once daily), rifaximin (50 mg/kg, p.o. twice daily), or irinotecan + rifaximin for 9 consecutive days. Signs of diarrhea, bloody diarrhea, and body weight were monitored daily. Intestinal tissues were harvested for histopathological analysis and quantitative PCR. SN38 and SN38G concentration in intestine were detected using LC-MS analysis. Intestinal bacteria β-glucuronidase (BGUS) activity was detected using mouse feces. We performed 16S rRNA sequencing to investigate the gut microbiota composition. Gut permeability was tested in vivo by measuring the fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran intensity in the serum. RESULTS: Rifaximin reduced the frequency of delayed diarrhea and attenuated the severity of diarrhea caused by irinotecan in mice. Rifaximin significantly inhibited SN38 exposure in intestine and irinotecan-induced increase in BGUS activity. Rifaximin alleviated intestinal mucosal inflammation, prevented intestinal epithelial damage caused by irinotecan, and maintained gut barrier function. Moreover, the consecutive use of rifaximin did not cause a disorder in gut microbiota and reduced irinotecan-induced Firmicutes expansion. More importantly, rifaximin inhibited the expansion of some microbiota (such as Blautia, Eggerthella, and f_Enterobacteriaceae) and promoted an increase in beneficial microbiota (such as Lactobacillus intestinalis, Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, and f_Oscillospiraceae). CONCLUSIONS: Preventive use of rifaximin is a feasible method to protect against irinotecan-induced diarrhea.

Vaginal swabs and fecal samples were collected. A novel interkingdom analysis was performed using 16 S rRNA and ITS1 gene sequencing to compare the diversity and taxonomic composition of vaginal microbiome (VMB) and gastrointestinal microbiome (GIMB). RESULTS: Twenty-seven women participated: 10 intermittent users and healthy controls and 7 maintenance therapy. The study revealed that microbiomes of fluconazole users do not differ in diversity metrics from healthy controls. RVVC patients using intermittent fluconazole displayed a higher abundance of vaginal C. albicans than healthy controls. Candida species pairings were not commonly observed between sites in individuals and, as such a fecal reservoir is unlikely to be implicated in recurrent symptomatology. In many of the RVVC non-Candida fungal spp. were identified in the vaginal microbiome. Users of fluconazole displayed elevations of the CST-I (Community State Type 1) associated bacterium L. crispatus. All participants displaying vaginal Candida spp. belonged to either bacterial CST-I or CST-III (Community State Type 3- L. iners associated). CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first study to compare the interkingdom VMB-GIMB of women with RVVC using oral fluconazole. As fluconazole users in this study represent a typical RVVC population, trends observed in microbial abundance require further analysis to establish fluconazole's long-term microbiome safety. Examining the microbiome at both sites adds to the current understanding of microbial associated with the condition.

We prospectively collected 50 ascitic fluid samples from ICU patients with suspected ascites infection. In addition to standard culture-based microbiological testing, an ascitic fluid aliquot underwent fungal DNA isolation and was analyzed by next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods for identification of fungal species. RESULTS: Of 50 ascitic samples collected, five samples showed growth of Candida spp. in culture. After DNA isolation and ITS2 PCR, detectable amplification was achieved in 10 samples. Sequencing of the 50 patients' samples identified facultative pathogenic fungi in 19 patients. In 15 cases, culture alone would not have permitted the identification of all facultative pathogenic fungi. The identification of fungal DNA by sequencing was significantly associated with poor patient outcome and a number of clinical parameters. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show a higher sensitivity for NGS-based diagnostic methods in the identification of ascitic fluid fungal infections compared to culture-based diagnostics. This may be beneficial especially for patients in a critical care setting, who have an increased prevalence of comorbidities and high mortality. The implementation of such methods in standard diagnosis will require increased standardization of the workflows and interpretation of the sequencing results with respect to patients' clinical picture.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa was the most prevalent pathogen cultured in the external ear in Queensland, at 37.9%. In inland regions, Staphylococcus aureus was the most prevalent organism. Children were three-fold less likely to have OE resulting from a fungal pathogen. DISCUSSION: The use of targeted antimicrobials against Pseudomonas aeruginosa in coastal regions during summer is sensible. Due to the low burden of fungal disease in children, there should be a high threshold for the commencement of antifungal ear drops.

Identifying effective biological control agents against fungal pathogens and determining their mechanisms of action are important in the control of plant diseases. RESULTS: In this study, we isolated an endophytic bacterial strain, GsB01, from the branches of asymptomatic Gleditsia sinensis. Multi-locus sequence analysis identified the strain as Bacillus velezensis. GsB01 exhibited significant antifungal activity against Thyronectria austroamericana, the causative agent of G. sinensis wilt. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry identified four consistently present antimicrobial compounds in GsB01 metabolite fractions with high antifungal activity: macrolactin A, bacillaene A, surfactin, and iturin. GsB01's active metabolite fractions altered the metabolic profiles of T. austroamericana, disrupting seven pathways, including arginine biosynthesis, nucleotide metabolism, purine metabolism, and the pentose phosphate pathway. Furthermore, absolute quantitative polymerase chain reaction analysis suggested that GsB01 may increase the abundance of endophytic bacteria in G. sinensis. The 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing revealed changes in the endophytic landscape in stems and roots following GsB01 introduction, particularly with significant variation in the dominant bacterial genera within the stems. CONCLUSION: The study highlights GsB01's potential against plant wilt and suggests that its antifungal activity is achieved by secreting antifungal metabolites. The study also recorded changes in the symbiotic microbiota within trees that had been infected with a pathogenic fungus and subsequently treated with an endophytic antagonistic bacterial strain. © 2024 Society of Chemical Industry.

This article employs bibliometric methods and visual maps to delineate the research background, collaborative relationships, hotspots, and trends in the study of gut fungi in human diseases and health. METHODS: Publications related to human gut fungi were retrieved from the Web of Science Core Collection. VOSviewer, CiteSpace, R software and Microsoft Excel were employed to generate visual representations illustrating the contributions made by countries/regions, authors, organizations, and journals. Employing VOSviewer and CiteSpace, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the retrieved publications, revealing underlying tendencies, research hotspots, and intricate knowledge networks. RESULTS: This study analyzed a total of 3,954 publications. The United States ranks first in the number of published papers and has the highest number of citations and h-index. Mostafa S Elshahed is the most prolific author. The University of California System is the institution that published the most papers. Frontiers In Microbiology is the journal with the largest number of publications. Three frequently co-cited references have experienced a citation burst lasting until 2024. CONCLUSION: Advancements in sequencing technologies have intensified research into human gut fungi and their health implications, shifting the research focus from gut fungal infections towards microbiome science. Inflammatory bowel diseases and Candida albicans have emerged as pivotal areas of interest in this endeavor. Through this study, we have gained a deeper insight into global trends and frontier hotspots within this field, thereby enhancing our understanding of the intricate relationship between gut fungi and human health.

The importance of gut microbes in mediating the benefits of lifestyle intervention is increasingly recognized. However, compared to the bacterial microbiome, the role of intestinal fungi in exercise remains elusive. With our established randomized controlled trial of exercise intervention in Chinese males with prediabetes (n = 39, ClinicalTrials.gov:NCT03240978), we investigated the dynamics of human gut mycobiome and further interrogated their associations with exercise-elicited outcomes using multi-omics approaches. METHODS: Clinical variations and biological samples were collected before and after training. Fecal fungal composition was analyzed using the internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) sequencing and integrated with paired shotgun metagenomics, untargeted metabolomics, and Olink proteomics. RESULTS: Twelve weeks of exercise training profoundly promoted fungal ecological diversity and intrakingdom connection. We further identified exercise-responsive genera with potential metabolic benefits, including Verticillium, Sarocladium, and Ceratocystis. Using multi-omics approaches, we elucidated comprehensive associations between changes in gut mycobiome and exercise-shaped metabolic phenotypes, bacterial microbiome, and circulating metabolomics and proteomics profiles. Furthermore, a machine-learning algorithm built using baseline microbial signatures and clinical characteristics predicted exercise responsiveness in improvements of insulin sensitivity, with an area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) of 0.91 (95% CI: 0.85-0.97) in the discovery cohort and of 0.79 (95% CI: 0.74-0.86) in the independent validation cohort (n = 30). CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that intense exercise training significantly remodels the human fungal microbiome composition. Changes in gut fungal composition are associated with the metabolic benefits of exercise, indicating gut mycobiome is a possible molecular transducer of exercise. Moreover, baseline gut fungal signatures predict exercise responsiveness for diabetes prevention, highlighting that targeting the gut mycobiome emerges as a prospective strategy in tailoring personalized training for diabetes prevention.

Entomopathogenic fungal infection-induced dysbiosis of host microbiota offers a window into understanding the complex interactions between pathogenic fungi and host symbionts. Such insights are critical for enhancing the efficacy of mycoinsecticides. However, the utilization of these interactions in pest control remains largely unexplored. RESULTS: Here, we found that infection by the host-specialist fungus Metarhizium acridum alters the composition of the symbiotic microbiota and increases the dominance of some bacterial symbionts in locusts. Meanwhile, M. acridum also effectively limits the overgrowth of the predominant bacteria. Comparative transcriptomic screening revealed that the fungus upregulates the production of MaCFEM1, an iron-binding protein, in the presence of bacteria. This protein sequesters iron, thereby limiting its availability. Functionally, overexpression of MaCFEM1 in the fungus induces iron deprivation, which significantly suppresses bacterial growth. Conversely, MaCFEM1 knockout relieves the restriction on bacterial iron availability, resulting in iron reallocation. Upon ΔMaCFEM1 infection, some host bacterial symbionts proliferate uncontrollably, turning into opportunistic pathogens and significantly accelerating host death. CONCLUSIONS: This study elucidates the critical role of pathogenic fungal-dominated iron allocation in mediating the shift of host microbes from symbiosis to pathogenicity. It also highlights a unique biocontrol strategy that jointly exploits pathogenic fungi and bacterial symbionts to increase host mortality. Video Abstract.

Respiratory diseases impose an immense health burden worldwide. Epidemiological studies have revealed extensive disparities in the incidence and severity of respiratory tract infections between men and women. It has been hypothesized that there might also be a nasal microbiome axis contributing to the observed sex disparities. RESULTS: Here, we study the nasal microbiome of healthy young adults in the largest cohort to date with 1593 individuals, using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. We compile the most comprehensive reference catalog for the nasal bacterial community containing 4197 metagenome-assembled genomes and integrate the mycobiome, to provide a valuable resource and a more holistic perspective for the understudied human nasal microbiome. We systematically evaluate sex differences and reveal extensive sex-specific features in both taxonomic and functional levels in the nasal microbiome. Through network analyses, we capture markedly higher ecological stability and antagonistic potentials in the female nasal microbiome compared to the male's. The analysis of the keystone bacteria reveals that the sex-dependent evolutionary characteristics might have contributed to these differences. CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we construct the most comprehensive catalog of metagenome-assembled-genomes for the nasal bacterial community to provide a valuable resource for the understudied human nasal microbiome. On top of that, comparative analysis in relative abundance and microbial co-occurrence networks identify extensive sex differences in the respiratory tract community, which may help to further our understanding of the observed sex disparities in the respiratory diseases.

Microbial community characteristics in patients with wound infections, microbiome-systemic inflammation associations, and bacteria-fungi correlations were analyzed. RESULTS: Infections constituted the primary cause of wounds in this study. Nontuberculous mycobacteria (23%) and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (13%) were the most common pathogens associated with chronic wounds, whereas Staphylococcus aureus (15%) was the most prevalent in non-chronic wound infections. Patients with chronic wound infections had a higher abundance of Pseudomonas aeruginosa than those without chronic wounds. Microbes with a high relative abundance in chronic wound infections were less significantly associated with plasma inflammatory factors than those in non-chronic wound infections. Additionally, a positive correlation between Candida glabrata and P. aeruginosa and an association between Malassezia restricta and anaerobic species were detected in patients with chronic wound infections. CONCLUSION: Our results further support the hypothesis that P. aeruginosa is a microbial biomarker of chronic wound infection regardless of the causative pathogens. Moreover, we propose a positive correlation between C. glabrata and P. aeruginosa in chronic wound infections, which advances the current understanding of fungi-bacteria correlations in patients with chronic wound infections.

The skin fungal communities of animals play a crucial role in maintaining host health and defending against pathogens. Because fungal infections can affect the skin microbiota of bats, gaining a comprehensive understanding of the characteristics of healthy bat skin fungal communities and the ecological processes driving them provides valuable insights into the interactions between pathogens and fungi. METHODS: We used Kruskal-Wallis tests and Permutational Multivariate Analysis of Variance (PERMANOVA) to clarify differences in skin fungal community structure among bat species. A Generalized Linear Model (GLM) based on a quasi-Poisson distribution and partial distance-based redundancy analysis (db-RDA) was performed to assess the influence of variables on skin fungal communities. Using community construction models to explore the ecological processes driving fungal community changes, t-tests and Wilcoxon tests were used to compare the alpha diversity and species abundance differences between the fungal structure on bat species' skin and the environmental fungal pool. RESULTS: We found significant differences in the composition and diversity of skin fungal communities among bat species influenced by temperature, sampling site, and body mass index. Trophic modes and skin fungal community complexity also varied among bat species. Null model and neutral model analysis demonstrated that deterministic processes dominated the assembly of skin fungal communities, with homogeneous selection as the predominant process. Skin fungal communities on bat species were impacted by the environmental fungal reservoir, and actively selected certain amplicon sequence variants (ASVs) from the environmental reservoir to adhere to the skin. CONCLUSION: In this study, we revealed the structure and the ecological process driving the skin fungal community across bat species in northern China. Overall, these results broaden our knowledge of skin fungal communities among bat species, which may be beneficial to potential strategies for the protection of bats in China.

Systemic inhibition of pro-inflammatory cytokines affects the skin microbiome; however, the impact of systemic anti-inflammatory therapy on the skin fungal microbiome is poorly understood. To examine the effects of cytokine inhibition on the fungal community on human skin and oral mucosa, we analyzed the composition of the skin mycobiome before and after IL-23 inhibition. METHODS: The study enrolled 15 psoriasis patients. Swab samples were collected from the psoriasis-free skin of antecubital fossa, post-auricular, and the tongue surface before and after 16 weeks of treatment with anti-IL-23 antibodies. Fungal DNA was sequenced by ITS1 metagenomic analysis, and taxonomic classification was performed. RESULTS: Data from samples collected from the antecubital fossa revealed that the α diversity of the skin mycobiome decreased significantly after treatment with anti-IL-23 antibodies (p = 0.0120). Fungal DNAs were not amplified in 6/15 swab samples after 16 weeks of IL-23 inhibition; by contrast, sufficiently detected in all 15 samples before treatment (p = 0.0554). A comparison of 9/15 paired samples containing well-detected reads revealed that the percentage of genus Malassezia in the mycobiome fell significantly after treatment with IL-23 inhibitors (before, 29.3% ± 9.9%; after; 8.5% ± 3.4%, p = 0.0137). The mycobiome on post-auricular skin and on the tongue surface showed no marked changes after IL-23 inhibition. CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the data suggest that inhibition of systemic IL-23 provokes dysbiosis of the mycobiome at the antecubital fossa skin, a finding characterized by reduced fungal diversity and a reduction in the percentage of the genus Malassezia.

The current study was performed on 240 cats that had visited veterinary health centers (Tehran, Iran) for examination. Sterile swabs from each cat's eyes were investigated for microbiological assessment. After sample collection, viral pathogens (Herpes and Calici viruses) were isolated and identified using the PCR method. The ages of the investigated group were 3.76, 3.93, and 4.15 months. RESULTS: The highest frequency of bacteria in the normal, Herpes-infected/Calici-infected, and Herpes/Calici-infected groups were associated with Staphylococcus intermedius and Streptococcus agalactiae, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Staphylococcus intermedius, respectively. In addition, it was found that the high prevalence of fungal microorganisms in the isolated samples was related to yeasts, Aspergillus (Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus niger), and Penicillium species. CONCLUSION: Bacterial prevalence was significantly higher in all groups than the prevalence of fungi in the eyes of cats. The statistical comparison between the study groups regarding microbial and fungal frequency showed that significant differences were found between them, such that the frequency was higher in all disease groups, against the control group. In addition, a significant relation was observed between the Herpes-infected and Calici-infected groups regarding microbial and fungal prevalence.

Cabbage Fusarium wilt (CFW) is a devastating disease caused by the soil-borne fungus Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. conglutinans (Foc). One of the optimal measures for managing CFW is the employment of tolerant/resistant cabbage varieties. However, the interplay between plant genotypes and the pathogen Foc in shaping the rhizosphere microbial community, and the consequent influence of these microbial assemblages on biological resistance, remains inadequately understood. RESULTS: Based on amplicon metabarcoding data, we observed distinct differences in the fungal alpha diversity index (Shannon index) and beta diversity index (unweighted Bray-Curtis dissimilarity) within the rhizosphere of the YR (resistant to Foc) and ZG (susceptible to Foc) cabbage varieties, irrespective of Foc inoculation. Notably, the Shannon diversity shifts in the resistant YR variety were more pronounced following Foc inoculation. Disease-resistant plant variety demonstrate a higher propensity for harboring beneficial microorganisms, such as Pseudomonas, and exhibit superior capabilities in evading harmful microorganisms, in contrast to their disease-susceptible counterparts. Furthermore, the network analysis was performed on rhizosphere-associated microorganisms, including both bacteria and fungi. The networks of association recovered from YR exhibited greater complexity, robustness, and density, regardless of Foc inoculation. Following Foc infection in the YR rhizosphere, there was a notable increase in the dominant bacterium NA13, which is also a hub taxon in the microbial network. Reintroducing NA13 into the soil significantly improved disease resistance in the susceptible ZG variety, by directly inhibiting Foc and triggering defense mechanisms in the roots. CONCLUSIONS: The rhizosphere microbial communities of these two cabbage varieties are markedly distinct, with the introduction of the pathogen eliciting significant alterations in their microbial networks which is correlated with susceptibility or resistance to soil-borne pathogens. Furthermore, we identified a rhizobacteria species that significantly boosts disease resistance in susceptible cabbages. Our results indicated that the induction of resistance genes leading to varied responses in microbial communities to pathogens may partly explain the differing susceptibilities of the cabbage varieties tested to CFW. Video Abstract.

We conducted a pot experiment to investigate the impact of A. oligospora treatment on the biocontrol efficiency of A. oligospora against Meloidogyne incognita infecting tomatoes. We analyzed the rhizosphere bacteria and fungi communities of tomato by high-throughput sequencing of the 16S rRNA gene fragment and the internal transcribed spacer (ITS). The results indicated that the application of A. oligospora resulted in a 53.6% reduction in the disease index of M. incognita infecting tomato plants. The bacterial diversity of rhizosphere soil declined in the A. oligospora-treated group, while fungal diversity increased. The A. oligospora treatment enriched the tomato rhizosphere with Acidobacteriota, Firmicutes, Bradyrhizobium, Sphingomonadales, Glomeromycota, and Purpureocillium. These organisms are involved in the utilization of rhizosphere organic matter, nitrogen, and glycerolipids, or play the role of ectomycorrhiza or directly kill nematodes. The networks of bacterial and fungal co-occurrence exhibited a greater degree of stability and complexity in the A. oligospora treatment group. CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated the key fungal and bacterial species that collaborate with the A. oligospora in controlling the root-knot nematode and elaborated the potential mechanisms involved. The findings offer valuable insights and inspiration for the advancement of bionematicide based on nematode-trapping fungi.

We conducted a prospective cohort study at tertiary medical institutes. Samples were collected from the tubes and filters of CPAP devices and the nasal mucosa of corresponding individuals using these devices. Microbiomes and mycobiomes were analyzed using 16S ribosomal RNA and internal transcribed spacer region sequencing. Results were compared according to the sampling site and usage duration for each patient. RESULTS: Overall, 27 paired human nasal mucosa and CPAP samples were analyzed. Bacteria were present in 7 of 27 tubes (29.6%) and 22 of 27 filters (81.5%). Fungi were present in 2 of the 27 tubes (7.4%) and 16 of the 27 filters (59.3%). Actinobacteria and Firmicutes were the predominant phyla among all samples. Fungi were not detected in any of the nasal mucosal samples. However, Basidiomycota and Ascomycota were predominant in the CPAP filters and tube samples. No significant associations were identified among the results according to sampling site and usage duration. CONCLUSION: Bacteria or fungi can be detected to some extent in CPAP samples even if the CPAP usage period is short. The association between respiratory infections and these microbiomes or mycobiomes was not investigated. Further research might be required to determine the risk posed by CPAP devices as a microbial contamination source.

Pneumonia is typically caused by a variety of pathogenic microorganisms. Traditional research often focuses on the infection of a few microorganisms, whereas metagenomic studies focus on the impact of the bacteriome and mycobiome on respiratory diseases. Reports on the virome characteristics of pediatric pneumonia remain relatively scarce. METHODS: We employed de novo assembly and combined homology- and feature-based methods to characterize the respiratory virome in whole-genome DNA sequencing samples from oropharynx (OP) swabs, nasopharynx (NP) swabs, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluids (BALF) of children with pneumonia. RESULTS: Significant differences were observed in the alpha and beta diversity indexes, as well as in the composition of the oropharyngeal virome, between pneumonia cases and controls. We identified 1137 viral operational taxonomic units (vOTUs) with significant differences, indicating a preference of pneumonia-reduced vOTUs for infecting Prevotella, Neisseria, and Veillonella, whereas pneumonia-enriched vOTUs included polyomavirus, human adenovirus, and phages targeting Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Granulicatella, and Actinomyces. Comparative analysis revealed higher relative abundances and prevalence rates of pneumonia-enriched OP vOTUs in NP and BALF samples compared to pneumonia-reduced vOTUs. Additionally, virome analysis identified six pediatric patients with severe human adenovirus or polyomavirus infections, five of whom might have been undetected by targeted polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based testing. CONCLUSIONS: This study offers insights into pediatric pneumonia respiratory viromes, highlighting frequent transmission of potentially pathogenic viruses and demonstrating virome analysis as a valuable adjunct for pathogen detection.

Trichosporon asahii (T. asahii) is part of the cutaneous fungal microbiota in humans and can cause lethal opportunistic infection. During infection, microorganisms can adapt to their environment by adjusting gene expression and cellular activities. OBJECTIVES: Investigation of the microevolutionary changes in T. asahii during chronic infection. METHODS: Two T. asahii strains were isolated from a chronic trichosporonosis patient between a 15-year interval, and the microevolutionary changes were compared by the immune response of dendritic cell (DC), mice survival model, and transcriptome sequencing analysis. RESULTS: Compared with the primary T. asahii strain, the microevolved strain induced much lower expression of TNF-α by mice bone marrow-derived DC and had a much superior survival rate, a total of 2212 significantly differentially expressed genes were identified in the microevolved strain, and functional analysis showed significance in the downregulated transcription and metabolic process, especially the valine, leucine, and isoleucine degradation pathways, which were associated with pathogenicity and virulence; hence, the results were highly consistent with the decreased immunogenicity and virulence of the microevolved strain. CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrated that the microevolution during chronic infection could induce changes in immunogenicity, virulence, and transcriptome, which might lead T. asahii to coexist with the host.

The interplay between root-knot nematode (RKN) parasitism and the complex web of host-associated microbiota has been recognized as pivotal for effective management of the pest. However, studies assessing this relationship have focussed on the bacterial and fungal communities, neglecting the unicellular eukaryotic members. Here, we employed amplicon sequencing analysis of the bacterial 16S rRNA, fungal ITS and eukaryotic 18S rRNA genes, and comprehensively examined how the microbiome composition, diversity and networking developed with time in the rhizospheres and roots of RKN-inoculated and non-inoculated tomato plants. RESULTS: As expected, infection with the RKN Meloidogyne incognita decreased plant growth. At individual timepoints, we found distinct bacterial, fungal and eukaryote community structures in the RKN-inoculated and non-inoculated rhizospheres and roots, and RKN inoculation affected several taxa in the root-associated microbiome differentially. Correlation analysis revealed several bacterial and fungal and few protist taxa that correlated negatively or positively with M. incognita. Moreover, network analysis using bacterial, fungal and eukaryotic data revealed more dynamic networks with higher robustness to disturbances in the RKN-inoculated than in the non-inoculated rhizospheres/roots. Hub taxa displayed a noticeable successional pattern that coincided with different phases of M. incognita parasitism. We found that fungal hubs had strong negative correlations with bacteria and eukaryotes, while positive correlations characterized hub members within individual kingdoms. CONCLUSION: Our results reveal dynamic tomato-associated microbiomes that develop along different trajectories in plants suffering M. incognita infestation and non-infested plants. Overall, the results identify stronger associations between RKN and bacterial and fungal taxa than between eukaryotic taxa and RKN, suggesting that fungal and bacterial communities could play a larger role in the regulation of RKN. The study identifies several putative RKN-antagonistic bacterial and fungal taxa and confirms the antagonistic potential previously identified in other taxa.

Thirty-two AFRS and 29 non-fungal CRSwNP patients (NF) were included in this study. Staphylococcus aureus was the dominant organism cultured and sequenced in both AFRS and NF groups (AFRS 27.54%; NF 18.04%; p = .07). Streptococcus pneumoniae (AFRS 12.31%; NF 0.98%; p = .03) and Haemophilus influenzae (AFRS 15.03%; NF 0.24%; p = .005) were significantly more abundant in AFRS. Bacterial diversity (Shannon's index) was considerably lower in AFRS relative to NF (AFRS 0.6; NF 1.0, p = .008). Aspergillus was the most cultured fungus in AFRS (10/32, 31.3%). The AFRS sequenced mycobiome was predominantly represented by Malassezia (43.6%), Curvularia (18.5%) and Aspergillus (16.8%), while the NF mycobiome was nearly exclusively Malassezia (84.2%) with an absence of Aspergillus or dematiaceous fungi. CONCLUSION: A low diversity, dysbiotic microenvironment dominated by Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae characterised the bacterial microbiome of AFRS, with a mycobiome abundant in Malassezia, Aspergillus and Curvularia. While Staphylococcus aureus has been previously implicated in AFRS through enterotoxin superantigen potential, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae are novel findings that may represent alternate cross-kingdom pathophysiological mechanisms.

In total, 435 (49.1%) women had a normal BV score, 352 (39.8%) had intermediate vaginal microbiota, and 98 (11.1%) had BV. Among the 98 women with BV, 71 (72.4%) also had fungal infection. There was a significant association of BV with discharge (p = 0.004) and abnormal cervix (p = 0.014). BV was significantly more frequent among the women who reported previous abortion or miscarriage (p = 0.007). CONCLUSIONS: About a tenth of women in Thua Thien Hue province have BV in the third trimester of pregnancy being associated with previous adverse outcome. Discharge with fishy odour is still a characteristic feature among subtle clinical presentations of BV. Better awareness about this disease and routine test-and-treat management during pregnancy may improve pregnancy outcome.

A retrospective, monocentric study was conducted from January 2013 to December 2023. Patients who underwent FBE and vaginal swabs following reported symptoms or suspected syndromic pictures of vulvovaginal infections were included. RESULTS: Two thousand one hundred ten patients were included and divided into a control group (n = 811, 38.4%) and a pathological group (n = 1299 patients, 61.6%), based on the presence of alterations at the FBE. In the pathological group, 1185 women (91% of positive FBE) had vaginal infections detected through vaginal swabs. The presence of lactobacilli and typical inflammatory cells was detected in 111 (8%) women with pathological FBE and correlated with higher rates of positive swabs for common germs (n = 104, 94%), often leading to co-infections (n = 30, 29%). Conversely, Döderlein's cytolysis (n = 56, 4.3% of positive FBE) indicated a predominance of positive human papillomavirus (HPV) swabs (n = 33, 59%). The presence of fungal elements (n = 208, 16% of positive FBE) suggested a higher prevalence of co-infections (n = 62, 30%). Similarly, mixed bacterial flora (n = 470, 36% of positive FBE) and Trichomonas vaginalis (n = 11, 0.8% of positive FBE) correlated with positive swabs for other pathogens, except for Mycoplasma (n = 0). Bacterial vaginosis (n = 443, 34% of positive FBE) was linked to co-infections (n = 142, 32%) and HPV (n = 123, 28%). CONCLUSION: The importance of conducting FBE in patients with vulvovaginal symptoms is emphasized. This approach aids in determining the need for further diagnostic tests like vaginal swabs, guided by microscopic findings. A strong correlation emerges between the presence of specific alterations in the FBE and an increased prevalence of certain infections.