1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Nov 20:2024.10.18.619118. doi: 
10.1101/2024.10.18.619118.

Longitudinal Microbiome-based Interpretable Machine Learning for Identification 
of Time-Varying Biomarkers in Early Prediction of Disease Outcomes.

Dai Y, Qian Y, Qu Y, Guan W, Xie J, Wang D, Butler C, Dashper S, Carroll I, 
Divaris K, Liu Y, Wu D.

Information generated from longitudinally-sampled microbial data has the 
potential to illuminate important aspects of development and progression for 
many human conditions and diseases. Identifying microbial biomarkers and their 
time-varying effects can not only advance our understanding of pathogenetic 
mechanisms, but also facilitate early diagnosis and guide optimal timing of 
interventions. However, longitudinal predictive modeling of highly noisy and 
dynamic microbial data (e.g., metagenomics) poses analytical challenges. To 
overcome these challenges, we introduce a robust and interpretable 
machine-learning-based longitudinal microbiome analysis framework, LP-Micro, 
that encompasses: (i) longitudinal microbial feature screening via a polynomial 
group lasso, (ii) disease outcome prediction implemented via machine learning 
methods (e.g., XGBoost, deep neural networks), and (iii) interpretable 
association testing between time points, microbial features, and disease 
outcomes via permutation feature importance. We demonstrate in simulations that 
LP-Micro can not only identify incident disease-related microbiome taxa but also 
offers improved prediction accuracy compared to existing approaches. 
Applications of LP-Micro in two longitudinal microbiome studies with clinical 
outcomes of childhood dental disease and weight loss following bariatric surgery 
yield consistently high prediction accuracy. The identified critical early 
predictive time points are informative and aligned with clinical expectations.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.10.18.619118
PMCID: PMC11601495
PMID: 39605360

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Nov 27;15(1):10291. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-54797-8.

Multi-biome analysis identifies distinct gut microbial signatures and their 
crosstalk in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.

Akiyama S(1), Nishijima S(#)(2), Kojima Y(3), Kimura M(4), Ohsugi M(5), Ueki 
K(6), Mizokami M(7), Hattori M(8), Tsuchiya K(1), Uemura N(9), Kawai T(10), Bork 
P(11), Nagata N(#)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. nishijima.suguru@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Research Strategic Planning Center for Clinical 
Sciences, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center Hospital, 
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Diabetes Research Center, Research Institute, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Genome Medical Sciences Project, Research Institute, National Center for 
Global Health and Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Laboratory for Microbiome Sciences, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Kohnodai Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(10)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, 
Tokyo, Japan. nnagata_ncgm@yahoo.co.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

The integrative multi-kingdom interaction of the gut microbiome in ulcerative 
colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) remains underinvestigated. Here, we 
perform shotgun metagenomic sequencing of feces from patients with UC and CD, 
and healthy controls in the Japanese 4D cohort, profiling bacterial taxa, gene 
functions, and antibacterial genes, bacteriophages, and fungi. External 
metagenomic datasets from the US, Spain, the Netherlands, and China were 
analyzed to validate our multi-biome findings. We found that Enterococcus 
faecium and Bifidobacterium spp. were enriched in both diseases. Enriched 
Escherichia coli was characteristic of CD and was linked to numerous antibiotic 
resistance genes involved in efflux pumps and adherent-invasive Escherichia coli 
virulence factors. Virome changes correlated with shifts in the bacteriome, 
including increased abundances of phages encoding pathogenic genes. 
Saccharomyces paradoxus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were enriched in UC and CD, 
respectively. Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli had negative 
associations with short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria in CD. 
Multi-biome signatures and their interactions in UC and CD showed high 
similarities between Japan and other countries. Since bacteria, phages, and 
fungi formed multiple hubs of intra- or trans-kingdom networks with SCFA 
producers and pathobionts in UC and CD, an approach targeting the interaction 
network may hold therapeutic promise.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-54797-8
PMCID: PMC11603027
PMID: 39604394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. mSystems. 2024 Nov 27:e0136624. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01366-24. Online ahead
of  print.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis induced by alcohol exposure in pubertal and adult mice.

Yang J(#)(1)(2), Wang H(#)(3)(4)(5), Lin X(6), Liu J(1)(7), Feng Y(1)(7), Bai 
Y(1)(7), Liang H(8)(9), Hu T(8)(9), Wu Z(3)(4), Lai J(1)(7), Liu J(2), Zou 
Y(3)(9), Wei S(1)(7), Yan P(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)College of Forensic Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 
China.
(2)BGI Research, Kunming, China.
(3)BGI Research, Shenzhen, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(5)School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao Medical College, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(6)School of Biology and Biological Engineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(7)NHC Key Laboratory of Forensic Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(8)BGI Research, Wuhan, China.
(9)Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Detection and Intervention of Human 
Intestinal Microbiome, BGI Research, Shenzhen, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Alcohol intake causes many diseases including neuropsychiatric symptoms, 
nutritional deficiency, progressive pancreatitis, liver cirrhosis, and ischemic 
heart disease. The gut microbiota changes significantly after alcohol exposure. 
Alcohol consumption tends to increase in underage and young people, but the 
feature of the gut microbiota in puberty remains largely unexplored. In this 
study, we conducted alcohol-exposed pubertal and adult mice model to investigate 
the intestinal damage and gut microbiota change. Interestingly, the responses of 
pubertal mice and adult mice after alcohol exposure were different. We found 
that alcohol dehydrogenase decreased and aldehyde dehydrogenase increased in the 
liver of pubertal mice, thus reducing the accumulation of toxic acetaldehyde. 
Furthermore, alcohol exposure caused less intestinal injury in pubertal mice. 
Through the analysis of metagenome assembly genome, we obtained many 
unrecognized bacterial genomes. Limosillactobacillus reuteri (cluster_56) and 
Lactobacillus intestinalis (cluster_57) were assembled from the samples of 
pubertal mice, which were involved in the production of indole acetic acid and 
the transformation of bile acids in response to alcohol exposure. This study 
provided a new insight to investigate the gut microbiota change and explained 
the difference of the gut microbiota after alcohol exposure between pubertal 
mice and adult mice.
IMPORTANCE: This study elucidates the significant impact of alcohol exposure on 
the gut microbiota and metabolic pathways in mice, highlighting the differential 
responses between adolescent and adult stages. Alcohol exposure was found to 
damage the intestinal barrier, alter the microbial composition by decreasing 
beneficial bacteria like Lactobacillus, and increase harmful bacteria such as 
Alistipes. The study also discovered unique microbial changes and resilience in 
pubertal mice. Species-level metagenomic analysis revealed specific microbial 
taxa and metabolic functions affected by alcohol. Metagenome-assembled genomes 
(MAGs) found many species that could not be annotated by conventional methods 
including many members of Lachnospiraceae, greatly expanding our understanding 
of the gut microbiota composition. These findings underscore the need for 
further research on alcohol's effects on various organs and the implications of 
microbial metabolites on disease progression.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01366-24
PMID: 39601556

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Nov 18;13(22):6938. doi: 10.3390/jcm13226938.

Gut Microbial Taxonomy and Its Role as a Biomarker in Aortic Diseases: A 
Systematic Review and Future Perspectives.

Neiroukh D(1)(2), Hajdarpasic A(3), Ayhan C(1)(2), Sultan S(2)(4)(5), Soliman 
O(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Cardiology, School of Medicine, University of Galway, H91 TK33 
Galway, Ireland.
(2)CORRIB-CURAM-Vascular Group, University of Galway, H91 TK33 Galway, Ireland.
(3)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Sarajevo Medical School, 
University Sarajevo School of Science and Technology, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
(4)Western Vascular Institute, Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, 
University Hospital Galway, University of Galway, H91 TK33 Galway, Ireland.
(5)Department of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Surgery, Galway Clinic, Royal 
College of Surgeons in Ireland, Galway Affiliated Hospital, H91 HHT0 Galway, 
Ireland.
(6)Euro Heart Foundation, 3071 Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Background/Objectives: Evidence of the association between the gut microbiome 
and cardiovascular diseases has accumulated. An imbalance or dysbiosis of this 
system has been shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular 
events, including aortic diseases. We aimed to elucidate the findings of the gut 
microbial taxonomy associated with aortic diseases and their subtypes. 
Furthermore, we sought to investigate whether gut microbiome dysbiosis can be 
used as a biomarker for aortic disease detection and to identify which species 
can be disease-specific. Methods: A systematic search was conducted using the 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) 
guidelines for original research papers on gut microbiome composition in 
patients with aortic disease, using patients without aortic disease as the 
control (i.e., healthy controls). The databases PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane, and 
Web of Science were used by employing the medical subject headings (MeSH) terms 
"aortic diseases", "microbiome"," microbiota", and "taxa" before August 2024. We 
extracted the study characteristics, study population, and gut microbiome in 
aortic disease, including microbiota taxa diversity and abundance, regardless of 
taxa level. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Quality Assessment Tool was 
used to assess study quality. Data were synthesized narratively to address the 
heterogeneity of the studies. Results: In this review, twelve studies that have 
identified gut microbial species and their potential impact on aortic disease 
pathogenesis were included. The studies showed the phyla dominance of Bacillota, 
Pseudomonadota, Actinomycetota, Bacteroidota, and Euryarchaeota in aortic 
disease patients. We also included the taxa sequencing methods and those used to 
extract the microorganisms. Aortic diseases were categorized into Takayasu's 
arteritis, giant cell arteritis, aortic aneurysm, and aortic dissection. Aortic 
disease patients had a higher rate of dysbiosis when compared to the healthy 
control groups, with significantly different microbiome composition. 
Conclusions: Patients with aortic disease exhibit a distinct difference between 
their gut microbiota composition and that of the healthy controls, which 
suggests a potential biomarker role of gut dysbiosis. Further exploration of the 
microbiome and its metagenome interface can help identify its role in aortic 
disease pathogenesis in depth, generating future therapeutic options. However, a 
unified methodology is required to identify potential microbial biomarkers in 
cardiovascular and cardiometabolic diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13226938
PMCID: PMC11594723
PMID: 39598083

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Nov 10;12(11):2281. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12112281.

Unveiling Emerging Opportunistic Fish Pathogens in Aquaculture: A Comprehensive 
Seasonal Study of Microbial Composition in Mediterranean Fish Hatcheries.

Skliros D(1), Kostakou M(1)(2), Kokkari C(3), Tsertou MI(3), Pavloudi C(4), 
Zafeiropoulos H(5), Katharios P(3), Flemetakis E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Biotechnology, School of 
Applied Biology and Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, 11855 
Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Applied Microbial Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental 
Research-UFZ, 04318 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Institute of Marine Biology, Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Hellenic Centre 
for Marine Research, 71500 Heraklion, Greece.
(4)European Marine Biological Resource Centre-European Research Infrastructure 
Consortium (EMBRC-ERIC), 75252 Paris, France.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, Department of Microbiology, Immunology 
and Transplantation, Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium.

The importance of microbial communities in fish hatcheries for fish health and 
welfare has been recognized, with several studies mapping these communities 
during healthy rearing conditions and disease outbreaks. In this study, we 
analyzed the bacteriome of the live feeds, such as microalgae, rotifers, and 
Artemia, used in fish hatcheries that produce Mediterranean species. Our goal 
was to provide baseline information about their structure, emphasizing in 
environmental putative fish pathogenic bacteria. We conducted 16S rRNA amplicon 
Novaseq sequencing for our analysis, and we inferred 46,745 taxonomically 
annotated ASVs. Results showed that incoming environmental water plays a 
significant role in the presence of important taxa that constitute presumptive 
pathogens. Bio-statistical analyses revealed a relatively stable bacteriome 
among seasonal samplings for every hatchery but a diverse bacteriome between 
sampling stations and a distinct core bacteriome for each hatchery. Analysis of 
putative opportunistic fish pathogenic genera revealed some co-occurrence 
correlation events and a high average relative abundance of Vibrio, 
Tenacibaculum, and Photobacterium genera in live feeds, reaching a grand mean 
average of up to 7.3% for the hatchery of the Hellenic Center of Marine Research 
(HCMR), 12% for Hatchery A, and 11.5% for Hatchery B. Mapping the bacteriome in 
live feeds is pivotal for understanding the marine environment and distinct 
aquaculture practices and can guide improvements in hatchery management, 
enhancing fish health and sustainability in the Mediterranean region.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12112281
PMCID: PMC11596916
PMID: 39597671

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Cureus. 2024 Oct 24;16(10):e72268. doi: 10.7759/cureus.72268. eCollection 2024
 Oct.

Pilots, Astronauts, and the Aerospace Microbiota: A Narrative Review of 
Occupational Impact.

Minoretti P(1), Fontana JM(2), Yilmaz Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Occupational Health, Studio Minoretti, Oggiono, ITA.
(2)Biotechnology, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Verbania, ITA.
(3)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan University, Rize, TUR.

The human microbiota plays a crucial role in maintaining health and preventing 
disease; however, the effects of occupational exposure on the microbiota of 
aircrew and astronauts are not fully understood. This narrative review aims to 
synthesize the current knowledge on microbiota alterations in aerospace 
medicine, assess the potential of probiotics as a countermeasure, and identify 
key gaps that warrant further research. The references were identified through 
searching PubMed for English articles published between 2010 and 2024, using 
keywords related to microbiota, probiotics, aviation, spaceflight, pilots, and 
astronauts. Additionally, the bibliographies of relevant papers were reviewed. 
Studies in aerospace medicine were selected based on their focus on the 
occupational impact on microbiota and the use of probiotics in this context. For 
aircrew, initial studies indicate a decrease in beneficial gut bacteria, 
suggesting that probiotics could enhance gastrointestinal health, immunity, and 
overall well-being. However, unsupervised use of probiotics carries potential 
risks. Conversely, spaceflight induces significant changes in the gut, skin, 
oral, and nasal microbiota of astronauts, characterized by altered diversity and 
abundance of specific microbial taxa. These changes include a relative decrease 
in the abundance of beneficial gut bacteria, an increase in opportunistic 
pathogens, and evidence of microbial transfer between astronauts and spacecraft 
surfaces. While simulated space studies suggest the potential for probiotics to 
mitigate dysbiosis, direct testing done during actual spaceflight is lacking. 
The observed microbiota changes during spaceflight are associated with various 
health implications, including alterations in metabolic pathways and 
interactions between the microbial metabolic capabilities and the host's 
metabolism. In conclusion, this review highlights the profound impact of 
spaceflight on astronaut microbiota and the promising role of probiotics as an 
intervention in both space and aviation medicine. However, significant research 
gaps remain. These include elucidating the functional implications of microbial 
shifts, developing personalized countermeasures, and validating the efficacy of 
probiotics during spaceflight. Future studies should leverage advanced tools 
such as metagenomic analysis and longitudinal tracking of astronaut health to 
inform targeted interventions that support the well-being of aerospace 
personnel. Integrating data across different sites of the body and missions, 
facilitated by resources like the Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA), can help 
identify consistent microbial changes induced by the unique occupational 
conditions of spaceflight and aviation. This integrated approach will be crucial 
for developing effective microbiota-based countermeasures to mitigate the 
occupational health risks associated with space and aviation.

Copyright © 2024, Minoretti et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.72268
PMCID: PMC11585399
PMID: 39583430

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2429754. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2429754. 
Epub 2024 Nov 17.

Dysrupted microbial tryptophan metabolism associates with SARS-CoV-2 acute 
inflammatory responses and long COVID.

Yao L(1)(2), Devotta H(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Lunjani N(2)(3), Sadlier C(4)(5), 
Lavelle A(2)(6), Albrich WC(7), Walter J(1)(2), O'Toole PW(1)(2), O'Mahony 
L(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(2)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
(4)Department of Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases & Hospital Epidemiology, Cantonal Hospital 
St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.

Protection against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
infection and risk of long COVID has been associated with the depletion or 
over-abundance of specific taxa within the gut microbiome. However, the 
microbial mechanisms mediating these effects are not yet known. We hypothesized 
that altered microbial production of tryptophan and its downstream derivatives 
might contribute to inappropriate immune responses to viral infection. In 
patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (n = 172), serum levels of tryptophan and 
indole-3-propionate (IPA) negatively correlated with serum levels of many 
proinflammatory mediators (including C-reactive protein and Serum amyloid A), 
while C-glycosyltryptophan (C-Trp), indole-3-lactic acid (ILA) and 
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) levels were positively correlated with levels of 
acute phase proteins, proinflammatory cytokines, alarmins and chemokines. A 
similar pattern was observed in long COVID patients (n = 20) where tryptophan 
and IPA were negatively associated with a large number of serum cytokines, while 
C-Trp and IAA were positively associated with circulating cytokine levels. 
Metagenomic analysis of the fecal microbiota showed the relative abundance of 
genes encoding the microbial enzymes required for tryptophan production (e.g. 
anthranilate synthase) and microbial tryptophan metabolism was significantly 
lower in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (n = 380) compared to healthy 
controls (n = 270). Microbial tryptophan metabolites reduced innate cell 
proinflammatory responses to cytosolic DNA sensor Stimulator of interferon genes 
(STING), toll-like receptor (TLR)-3 and TLR-4 stimulation in vitro, while 
IL-10 secretion was enhanced. Microbial tryptophan metabolites also modified ex 
vivo human lymphocyte responses by limiting the production of TH1 and TH17 
associated cytokines, while enhancing secretion of IL-22. These data suggest 
that lower levels of tryptophan production and tryptophan metabolism by gut 
microbes may increase the risk of severe and chronic outcomes to SARS-CoV-2 
infection due to impaired innate and adaptive responses to infection. Screening 
patients for lower-level microbiome capacity for tryptophan metabolism may help 
identify at-risk individuals.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2429754
PMCID: PMC11581176
PMID: 39551951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LOM is a consultant to PrecisionBiotics and has 
received research funding from GSK, Chiesi, Reckitt and Fonterra. LOM has 
participated in speaker’s bureau for Nestle, Nutricia, Yakult, Reckitt and 
Abbott. PWOT has received funding from Fonterra New Zealand and has participated 
in a speaker’s bureau for Yakult-Springer/Nature. None of the other authors 
report any potential conflict of interest.

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2024 Nov 15:S0002-9165(24)00882-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.011. Online ahead of print.

Associations between dietary fibers and gut microbiome composition in the EDIA 
longitudinal infant cohort.

Lalli MK(1), Salo TEI(2), Hakola L(3), Knip M(4), Virtanen SM(5), Vatanen T(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Public Health, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland; Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere 
University, Tampere, Finland.
(3)Department of Public Health, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland; Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere 
University, Tampere, Finland; Tampere University Hospital, Wellbeing Services 
County of Pirkanmaa, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Research Program for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; New Children's Hospital, Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Tampere Center for Child Health 
Research, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(5)Department of Public Health, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland; Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere 
University, Tampere, Finland; Tampere University Hospital, Wellbeing Services 
County of Pirkanmaa, Tampere, Finland; Tampere Center for Child Health Research, 
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(6)Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 
Electronic address: tommi.vatanen@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUND: The infant gut microbiome undergoes rapid changes in the first year 
of life, supporting normal development and long-term health. While diet shapes 
this process, the role of fibers in complementary foods on gut microbiome 
maturation is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: We explored how the transition from human milk to fibers in 
complementary foods shapes the taxonomic and functional maturation of the gut 
microbiome within the first year of life.
METHODS: We assessed the longitudinal and cross-sectional development of infant 
gut microbiomes (N=68 infants) and metabolomes (N=33 infants) using linear mixed 
models to uncover their associations to dietary fibers and their food sources. 
Fiber intakes were assessed with 3-day food records (months 3,6,9,12) relying on 
CODEX-compliant fiber fraction values, and questionnaires tracked the overall 
complementary food introduction. Bacterial species were identified and 
quantified via MetaPhlAn2 from metagenomic data, and metabolomic profiles were 
obtained using four LC-MS methods.
RESULTS: We identified 176 complementary food fiber-bacterial species 
associations. First plant-based fibers associated to microbiota compositions 
similar to breastfeeding, and further associated with aromatic amino acid 
metabolites, including 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (Total dietary fiber - 
Complementary foods (g) - β=3.50, CI 2.48-4.52, p=6.53x10-5). Distinct fibers 
from different food categories showed unique associations with specific 
bacterial taxa. Key species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitznii, associated 
with oat fibers (g/MJ, β=2.18, CI 1.36-2.84, p=6.12x10-6), reflective of 
maturing microbial communities. Fiber intake during weaning associated with 
shifts in metabolite profiles, including immunomodulatory metabolites, with 
fiber effects observed in a source- and timing-dependent manner, implicated in 
gradual microbiome diversification.
CONCLUSIONS: Introducing complementary dietary fibers during the weaning period 
supports gut microbiome diversification and stabilization. Even minor dietary 
variations showed significant associations with microbial taxa and functions 
from the onset of weaning, highlighting the importance of infant dietary 
recommendations that support the gut microbiome maturation during early life.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01735123. 
Date of registration: November 24, 2012. https://www.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT01735123.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.011
PMID: 39551356

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest ☒ The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Mikael Knip reports financial 
support was provided by National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases (NIDDK). Mikael Knip reports financial support was provided by National 
Institutes of Health (1DP3DK094338-01). Mikael Knip reports financial support 
was provided by the Academy of Finland Centre of Excellence in Molecular Systems 
Immunology and Physiology Research 2012-17 (250114). Mikael Knip reports 
financial support was provided by the Medical Research Funds, Tampere and 
Helsinki University Hospitals. Tommi Vatanen reports was provided by The startup 
funding from the Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of Helsinki. 
Tommi Vatanen reports a relationship with Nestle Nutrition Institute (NNI) that 
includes: speaking and lecture fees. If there are other authors, they declare 
that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Cell. 2024 Nov 4:S0092-8674(24)01204-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.022.
Online  ahead of print.

Fecal microbial load is a major determinant of gut microbiome variation and a 
confounder for disease associations.

Nishijima S(1), Stankevic E(2), Aasmets O(3), Schmidt TSB(1), Nagata N(4), 
Keller MI(1), Ferretti P(1), Juel HB(2), Fullam A(1), Robbani SM(1), Schudoma 
C(1), Hansen JK(5), Holm LA(6), Israelsen M(5), Schierwagen R(7), Torp N(5), 
Telzerow A(1), Hercog R(1), Kandels S(1), Hazenbrink DHM(1), Arumugam M(2), 
Bendtsen F(8), Brøns C(9), Fonvig CE(10), Holm JC(10), Nielsen T(11), Pedersen 
JS(8), Thiele MS(5), Trebicka J(12), Org E(3), Krag A(5), Hansen T(2), Kuhn 
M(13), Bork P(14); GALAXY and MicrobLiver Consortia.

Collaborators: Hansen T, Mann M, Matthijnssens J, Krag A, Bork P, Arumugam M, 
Trebicka J, Karsdal M, Anastasiadou E, Israelsen H, Melberg HO, Legido-Quigley 
C, Thiele M.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Systems Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark; 
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(6)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; The Children's Obesity Clinic, Department of 
Pediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital Holbæk, Holbæk, Denmark.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine B, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(8)Gastrounit, Medical Division, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, 
Hvidovre, Denmark.
(9)Clinical Research, Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark.
(10)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; The Children's Obesity Clinic, Department of 
Pediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital Holbæk, Holbæk, Denmark; Department 
of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 
Medical department, University Hospital Zeeland, Køge, Denmark.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine B, University of Münster, Münster, Germany; 
European Foundation for the Study of Chronic Liver Failure, EFCLIF, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(13)Molecular Systems Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: mkuhn@embl.de.
(14)Molecular Systems Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany; Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, 
Germany; Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 
Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address: peer.bork@embl.org.

The microbiota in individual habitats differ in both relative composition and 
absolute abundance. While sequencing approaches determine the relative 
abundances of taxa and genes, they do not provide information on their absolute 
abundances. Here, we developed a machine-learning approach to predict fecal 
microbial loads (microbial cells per gram) solely from relative abundance data. 
Applying our prediction model to a large-scale metagenomic dataset (n = 34,539), 
we demonstrated that microbial load is the major determinant of gut microbiome 
variation and is associated with numerous host factors, including age, diet, and 
medication. We further found that for several diseases, changes in microbial 
load, rather than the disease condition itself, more strongly explained 
alterations in patients' gut microbiome. Adjusting for this effect substantially 
reduced the statistical significance of the majority of disease-associated 
species. Our analysis reveals that the fecal microbial load is a major 
confounder in microbiome studies, highlighting its importance for understanding 
microbiome variation in health and disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.022
PMID: 39541968

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2024 Nov 12:S0002-9165(24)00878-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.007. Online ahead of print.

Associations of alcohol intake with gut microbiome: a prospective study in a 
predominantly low-income Black/African American population.

Liu L(1), Nguyen SM(1), Wang L(1), Shi J(1), Long J(1), Cai Q(1), Shrubsole 
MJ(1), Shu XO(1), Zheng W(1), Yu D(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology 
Center, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology 
Center, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States. 
Electronic address: danxia.yu@vumc.org.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol intake can alter gut microbiome, which may subsequently 
affect human health. However, limited population-based, prospective studies have 
investigated associations of habitual and recent alcohol intake with the gut 
microbiome, particularly among Black/African American individuals.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the association of alcohol intake with gut microbiome in 
a predominantly low-income Black/African American population.
METHODS: We investigated the dose- and type-specific associations of habitual 
and recent alcohol intake with the gut microbiome among 538 Black/African 
American adults (150 males and 388 females). Habitual and recent alcohol intakes 
were assessed at cohort baseline (2002-2009) and stool collection (2018-2021), 
respectively. Gut microbiome was profiled using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. 
Generalized linear models were employed to evaluate the associations between 
alcohol intakes and gut microbiome composition, with adjustments for 
sociodemographic characteristics, other lifestyle factors, and comorbidities. 
False discovery rate (FDR) <0.1 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: The mean age at enrollment was 53.2 ± 7.7 y, with a mean interval of 
13.8 y (range: 9.0-18.1 y) between baseline and stool sample collection. Recent 
alcohol intake was not significantly associated with microbial taxa abundance. 
However, habitual alcohol intake, both total amount and types of alcoholic 
beverages, showed significant associations with several microbial taxa 
abundance, primarily in males, including species within classes Clostridia, 
Bacilli, and Mahellia within Firmicutes. Specifically, total alcohol, beer, and 
red wine intakes were all inversely associated with genus MGYG-HGUT-02719 within 
class Clostridia (β = -2.26 to -0.09 per 1 drink/d increase). Red wine 
consumption was also inversely associated with the abundance of genera CAG-110, 
Oscillibacter, and Gemmiger within class Clostridia (β = -3.88 to -2.69), 
whereas positively associated with genus Absiella (β = 1.81) within class 
Bacilli. Most of these associations remained significant after additionally 
adjusting for BMI and baseline comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified gut microbial taxa associated with habitual alcohol 
intake among Black/African American males, although the magnitudes of these 
associations were generally small. Further research is needed to determine if 
these bacteria modify alcohol-disease relationships.

Copyright © 2024 American Society for Nutrition. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.007
PMID: 39537028

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.

1. Microbes Infect. 2024 Nov 9:105434. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105434. Online 
ahead of print.

Bad company? The pericardium microbiome in people investigated for tuberculous 
pericarditis in an HIV-prevalent setting.

Nyawo G(1), Naidoo CC(1), Wu BG(2), Kwok B(3), Clemente JC(4), Li Y(3), Minnies 
S(5), Reeve B(5), Moodley S(1), John TJ(6), Karamchand S(7), Singh S(3), 
Pecararo A(7), Doubell A(7), Kyriakakis C(8), Warren R(5), Segal LN(3), Theron 
G(9).

Author information:
(1)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of 
Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; African Microbiome Institute, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, 
South Africa.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA; Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care, Veterans Affairs New York Harbor Healthcare System, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, USA.
(5)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of 
Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stellenbosch University & 
Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa; Panorama Mediclinic, Cape 
Town, South Africa.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stellenbosch University & 
Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stellenbosch University & 
Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa; Life Vincent Pallotti 
Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(9)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of 
Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; African Microbiome Institute, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, 
South Africa. Electronic address: gtheron@sun.ac.za.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Apr 27:2024.04.26.24306431. doi: 10.1101/2024.04.26.24306431.

BACKGROUND: The site-of-disease microbiome and predicted metagenome were 
evaluated in a cross-sectional study involving people with presumptive 
tuberculous pericarditis. We also explored the interaction between C-reactive 
protein (CRP) and the microbiome.
METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) 
provided pericardial fluid for sequencing and blood for CRP measurement.
RESULTS: Pericardial fluid microbiota differed in β-diversity among people with 
definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous 
pericarditis. dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria-enriched vs. 
nTBs. HIV-positive dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium-, 
Methylobacterium-, and Leptothrix-enriched vs. HIV-negative dTBs. HIV-positive 
dTBs on ART were Mycobacterium- and Bifidobacterium-depleted vs. those not on 
ART. dTBs exhibited enrichment in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and 
mycobacterial metabolism pathways vs. nTBs. Additional non-pericardial 
involvement (pulmonary infiltrates) was associated with Mycobacterium-enrichment 
and Streptococcus-depletion. Mycobacterium reads were in 34 % (31/91) of dTBs, 
8 % (2/25) of pTBs and 17 % (4/23) nTBs. People with CRP above (vs. below) the 
median value had different β-diversity (Pseudomonas-depleted). No correlation 
was found between enriched taxa in dTBs and CRP.
CONCLUSIONS: Pericardial fluid microbial composition varies by tuberculosis 
status, HIV (and ART) status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The 
clinical significance, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires 
evaluation.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105434
PMID: 39528106

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Nov 11:gkae1004. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae1004. Online
ahead  of print.

The mOTUs online database provides web-accessible genomic context to taxonomic 
profiling of microbial communities.

Dmitrijeva M(1), Ruscheweyh HJ(1), Feer L(1), Li K(1), Miravet-Verde S(1), 
Sintsova A(1), Mende DR(2), Zeller G(3)(4)(5), Sunagawa S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology and Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention (MMI), Amsterdam University 
Medical Center, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Leiden University Center for Infectious Diseases (LUCID), Leiden University 
Medical Center, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Center for Microbiome Analyses and Therapeutics, Leiden University Medical 
Center, 2333ZA Leiden, Netherlands.

Determining the taxonomic composition (taxonomic profiling) is a fundamental 
task in studying environmental and host-associated microbial communities. 
However, genome-resolved microbial diversity on Earth remains undersampled, and 
accessing the genomic context of taxa detected during taxonomic profiling 
remains a challenging task. Here, we present the mOTUs online database 
(mOTUs-db), which is consistent with and interfaces with the mOTUs taxonomic 
profiling tool. It comprises 2.83 million metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) 
and 919 090 single-cell and isolate genomes from 124 295 species-level taxonomic 
units. In addition to being one of the largest prokaryotic genome resources to 
date, all MAGs in the mOTUs-db were reconstructed de novo in 117 902 individual 
samples by abundance correlation of scaffolds across multiple samples for 
improved quality metrics. The database complements the Genome Taxonomy Database, 
with over 50% of its species-level taxonomic groups being unique. It also offers 
interactive querying, enabling users to explore and download genomes at various 
taxonomic levels. The mOTUs-db is accessible at https://motus-db.org.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkae1004
PMID: 39526369

1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2024 Nov 9. doi: 10.1007/s10096-024-04980-y. 
Online ahead of print.

Clinical relevance of lung microbiota composition in critically ill children 
with acute lower respiratory tract infections: insights from a retrospective 
analysis of metagenomic sequencing.

Men Z(1), Chen Z(1), Gu X(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Fang F(2), Shen M(3), Huang 
S(1), Wu S(1), Zhou L(4), Bai Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 
92, Zhongnan Street, Suzhou Industrial park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215025, China.
(2)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Medical Department, Nanjing Dinfectome Technology Inc., Nanjing, Jiangsu, 
China.
(4)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 
92, Zhongnan Street, Suzhou Industrial park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215025, China. 
libing_zhou@outlook.com.
(5)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 
92, Zhongnan Street, Suzhou Industrial park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215025, China. 
18913510429@163.com.

PURPOSE: Acute lower respiratory tract infections (ALRIs) is a leading cause of 
child mortality worldwide. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) 
identifies ALRIs pathogens and explores the lung microbiota's role in disease 
severity and clinical outcomes. This study examines the association between lung 
microbiota and ALRIs outcomes in children, exploring its potential as a 
prognostic biomarker.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed mNGS data from the bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid (BALF) of 83 pediatric ALRIs patients from 2019 to 2023. Microbial 
diversity and relative abundances of specific taxa were compared between 
survivor and non-survivor groups, as well as between varying severity levels. 
LEfSe was employed to identify key biomarkers related to survival and disease 
severity.
RESULTS: Among the 83 patients, 68 survived and 15 died. Patients were also 
divided into a low severity group (n = 38) and a moderate-to-very-high severity 
group (n = 45) according to mPIRO score at admission. Significant differences in 
beta diversity were observed between the survival groups and across different 
severity levels. Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella exhibited higher 
abundances in both the survivor and low severity groups, suggesting their 
potential as predictors of better outcomes. Conversely, Enterococcus and 
Acinetobacter baumannii were more prevalent in the non-survivor and 
moderate-to-very-high severity groups. Additionally, Streptococcus pneumoniae 
and Streptococcus mitis showed increased abundances in survivors. LEfSe further 
revealed that these microorganisms may predict outcomes and severity in ALRIs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings underscore the complex relationship between lung 
microbiota and ALRIs, with specific microbial profiles associated with disease 
severity and clinical outcomes. This underscores the need for further research 
to explore and validate its prognostic predictive capacity.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-024-04980-y
PMID: 39520618

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2024 Nov 7;191:275-286. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020.
Online  ahead of print.

Associations of the gut microbiome with outcomes in cervical and endometrial 
cancer patients treated with pembrolizumab: Insights from the phase II PRIMMO 
trial.

De Jaeghere EA(1), Hamerlinck H(2), Tuyaerts S(3), Lippens L(4), Van Nuffel 
AMT(5), Baiden-Amissah R(6), Vuylsteke P(7), Henry S(8), Trinh XB(9), van Dam 
PA(10), Aspeslagh S(11), De Caluwé A(12), Naert E(13), Lambrechts D(14), Hendrix 
A(15), De Wever O(16), Van de Vijver KK(17), Amant F(18), Vandecasteele K(19), 
Verhasselt B(20), Denys HG(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: emiel.dejaeghere@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: hannelore.hamerlinck@uzgent.be.
(3)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Medical Oncology, 
University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; Laboratory for Medical and 
Molecular Oncology (LMMO), VUB, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
sandra.tuyaerts@uzbrussel.be.
(4)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: lien.lippens@ugent.be.
(5)Anticancer Fund (ACF), Strombeek-Bever, Belgium.
(6)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
reginaesimensimah.baidenamissah@kuleuven.be.
(7)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: peter.vuylsteke@uclouvain.be.
(8)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: stephanie.henry@uclouvain.be.
(9)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), University 
Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research (CORE), 
Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, Belgium. 
Electronic address: xuanbich.trinh@uza.be.
(10)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital 
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), 
University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research 
(CORE), Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, 
Belgium. Electronic address: peter.vandam@uza.be.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, 
Belgium. Electronic address: sandrine.aspeslagh@uzbrussel.be.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium; 
Department of Radiation Oncology, General Hospital Sint-Maarten, Mechelen, 
Belgium. Electronic address: alex.decaluwe@bordet.be.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
eline.naert@ugent.be.
(14)VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, Belgium. Electronic address: 
diether.lambrechts@kuleuven.be.
(15)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: an.hendrix@ugent.be.
(16)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: olivier.dewever@ugent.be.
(17)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; Center for Gynecologic 
Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer Institute and Amsterdam Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
koen.vandevijver@uzgent.be.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Center for Gynecologic Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer 
Institute and Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: f.amant@nki.nl.
(19)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: katrien.vandecasteele@uzgent.be.
(20)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
Electronic address: bruno.verhasselt@uzgent.be.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
hannelore.denys@ugent.be.

BACKGROUND: The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen 
in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) 
carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory 
studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented.
METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained 
from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta 
diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear 
discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, 
disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were 
performed.
RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with 
the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall 
or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM 
taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between 
patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those 
with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its 
higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its 
Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct 
bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than 
four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence 
interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but 
non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data.
CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the 
intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and 
EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT 
Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020
PMID: 39515198

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest EAD: travel 
and accommodation expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, GSK, 
and Pfizer. AMTV: became an employee for GSK during the publication development. 
PV: consulting or advisory role (personal) from Eli Lily and Company, MSD, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche; research funding from Tesaro. SH: 
consulting or advisory role (personal) from AstraZeneca, BMSi, Gilead Sciences, 
Merck, MSD Oncology, Novartis, and Sanofi. SA: consulting or advisory role 
(institutional, not personal) for MSD, Sanofi, Roche, BMS, and Pfizer; research 
funding (institutional, not personal) from Sanofi. AD: research funding 
(institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca. EN: travel and accommodation 
expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pfizer, 
PharmaMar, Roche, and Teva. FA: consulting or advisory role (institutional, not 
personal) for MiMark. KV: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, not 
personal) from PharmaMar. HGD: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, 
not personal) from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lily and Company, GSK, MSD, Novartis, 
Pfizer, PharmaMar, Roche, Tesaro, and Teva; research funding (institutional, not 
personal) from Roche. HH, ST, LL, RB, XBT, PAV, AH, OD, KKV, and BV: declare no 
competing interests.

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2024 Nov 7;26(1):191. doi: 10.1186/s13075-024-03413-7.

Outgrowth of Escherichia is susceptible to aggravation of systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Gui L(#)(1), Zuo X(#)(2), Feng J(1), Wang M(3)(4), Chen Z(1), Sun Y(1), Qi J(1), 
Chen Z(5), Pathak JL(6), Zhang Y(1), Cui C(7), Zhang P(5), Guo X(1), Lv Q(1), 
Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(2), Gu J(8), Lin Z(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou 
Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Longgang Maternity and Child Institute of Shantou 
University Medical College (Longgang District Maternity & Child Healthcare 
Hospital of Shenzhen City), Shenzhen, China.
(4)Microbiome Therapy Center, Department of Experiment & Research, Medical 
School, South China Hospital, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)School and Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong Engineering Research Center of 
Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Basic and 
Applied Research of Oral Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. gujieruo@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. lzm-zj99@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is linked to host gut dysbiosis. 
Here we performed faecal gut microbiome sequencing to investigate SLE-pathogenic 
gut microbes and their potential mechanisms.
METHODS: There were 134 healthy controls (HCs) and 114 SLE cases for 16 S 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing and 97 HCs and 124 SLE cases for shotgun 
metagenomics. Faecal microbial changes and associations with clinical phenotypes 
were evaluated, and SLE-associated microbial genera were identified in amplicon 
analysis. Next, metagenomic sequencing was applied for accurate identification 
of microbial species and discovery of their metabolic pathways and immunogenic 
peptides both relevant to SLE. Finally, contribution of specific taxa to disease 
development was confirmed by oral gavage into lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice.
RESULTS: SLE patients had gut microbiota richness reduction and composition 
alteration, particularly lupus nephritis and active patients. 
Proteobacteria/Bacteroidetes (P/B) ratio was remarkably up-regulated, and 
Escherichia was identified as the dominantly expanded genus in SLE, followed by 
metagenomics accurately located Escherichia coli and Escherichia unclassified 
species. Significant associations primarily appeared among Escherichia coli, 
metabolic pathways of purine nucleotide salvage or peptidoglycan maturation and 
SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI), and between multiple epitopes from 
Escherichia coli and disease activity or renal involvement phenotype. Finally, 
gavage with faecal Escherichia revealed that it upregulated lupus-associated 
serum traits and aggravated glomerular lesions in MRL/lpr mice.
CONCLUSION: We characterize a novel SLE exacerbating Escherichia outgrowth and 
suggest its contribution to SLE procession may be partially associated with 
metabolite changes and cross-reactivity of gut microbiota-associated epitopes 
and host autoantigens. The findings could provide a deeper insight into gut 
Escherichia in the procession of SLE.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-024-03413-7
PMCID: PMC11542361
PMID: 39511594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microb Pathog. 2024 Dec;197:107106. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.107106. Epub 
2024 Nov 6.

Analyses of the gut microbial composition of domestic pig louse Haematopinus 
suis.

Deng YP(1), Yao C(2), Fu YT(3), Zhuo Y(1), Zou JL(1), Pan HY(1), Peng YY(1), Liu 
GH(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.
(2)Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine and One Health Center for 
Zoonoses and Tropical Infectious Diseases, Ross University School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Basseterre, Saint Kitts and Nevis.
(3)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China; Department of 
Parasitology, Xiangya School of Basic Medicine, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan Province, China.
(4)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China. Electronic 
address: liuguohua5202008@163.com.

Haematopinus suis is an obligatory ectoparasite of the domestic pig, serving as 
a vector of several swine pathogens and posing great threats to the pig 
industry. The gut microbiome of lice is thought of an important mediator of 
their healthy physiology. However, there is a great paucity of lice-associated 
microbial communities' structure and function. The current study aimed to 
profile the gut microbiome and to understand the microbial functions of swine 
lice by metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatics analyses. In total, 102,358 
(77.2 %) nonredundant genes were cataloged, by contrast, only a small proportion 
of genes were assigned to microbial taxa and functional assemblages. Bacteria of 
known or potential public health significance such as Anaplasma phagocytophilum, 
Chlamydia trachomatis, Waddlia chondrophila, Bacillus cereus, and Leptotrichia 
goodfellowii were observed in all samples. The integrated microbial profile 
further illustrated the evolutionary relevance of endosymbionts and detailed the 
functional composition, and findings suggested H. suis may acquire 
adenosylcobalamin by feeding due to an adenosylcobalamin synthesis defect and a 
lack of complete synthases of endosymbionts. Sucking lice contained fewer 
functional genes compared with ticks and fleas probably because of the obligate 
host specificity of parasitic lice. In addition, the genes from the intestines 
contained encompassed most of the microbial functional genes in sucking lice. A 
wide range of unknown taxonomic and functional assemblages were discovered, 
which improves our understanding related to microbial features and physiological 
activities of sucking lice. In general, this study increases the 
characterization of the microbiota of lice and offers clues for preventing and 
controlling lice infestation in swine production in the future.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.107106
PMID: 39510362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that all authors have read this original article and had no conflict of 
interest.

1. Thromb Res. 2024 Dec;244:109204. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2024.109204. Epub
2024  Oct 31.

Microbial signatures in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension thrombi: 
Insights from metagenomic profiling of fresh and organized thrombi.

Zheng X(1), Xu M(2), Zhang Z(3), Yang L(4), Liu X(1), Zhen Y(1), Ye Z(1), Wen 
J(5), Liu P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China; Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of Clinical 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)China-Japan Friendship Hospital (Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences), 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, China.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China. Electronic address: jianyanwen@sina.com.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China; Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of Clinical 
Medicine, Beijing, China. Electronic address: liupeng6618@yeah.net.

OBJECTIVE: Many studies have reported microbial signatures in thrombi at major 
vascular sites, such as the coronary artery and the middle cerebral artery, 
which are critical for maintaining proper blood flow and oxygenation. Chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is a condition involving 
non-resolving thrombosis that has not been fully studied. This study explored 
the microbial taxonomy and functional profiles of both fresh and organized 
thrombi associated with CTEPH to investigate the role of microbiota in thrombus 
non-resolving.
METHODS: In this study, 12 CTEPH fresh thrombi and 12 organized thrombi were 
collected from 14 patients with CTEPH. Metagenomic sequencing was employed to 
explore the genomic information of all microorganisms in the thrombus samples.
RESULTS: Our data demonstrated a diverse range of microorganisms in CTEPH 
thrombi, whether fresh or organized. Notably, a considerable proportion (54.7 %) 
of sequencing data could not be classified into the relative microbial taxa, 
highlighting the complexity and novelty of the thrombus ecosystem. Although 
there were no significant differences in microbial community structure between 
the two groups, the abundance of dominant microbial species varied. Leuconostoc 
sp. DORA 2, Staphylococcus aureus, and Aliidongia dinghuensis were common 
dominant species in CTEPH thrombus. Organized thrombus significantly increased 
the relative abundance of Staphylococcus aureus, which was confirmed to 
effectively distinguish between organized and fresh thrombi by LeFSe analysis 
and random forest analysis. Functional annotation using both the KEGG and eggNOG 
databases revealed that organized thrombi exhibit stronger metabolic functions, 
particularly in amino acid metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that microbial composition and function may 
play an important role in thrombus organization. Targeting inflammation to 
prevent thrombosis presents promising opportunities for further research in this 
area.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2024.109204
PMID: 39499979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Curr Microbiol. 2024 Nov 3;81(12):439. doi: 10.1007/s00284-024-03969-2.

Deciphering Phyllomicrobiome of Cauliflower Leaf: Revelation by Metagenomic and 
Microbiological Analysis of Tolerant and Susceptible Genotypes Against Black Rot 
Disease.

Geat N(1)(2), Singh D(3)(4), Saha P(5), Jatoth R(6), Babu PL(1), Devi GSR(7), 
Lakhran L(2), Singh D(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New 
Delhi, 110012, India.
(2)Agricultural Research Station, Mandor, Agriculture University, Jodhpur, 
342304, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New 
Delhi, 110012, India. dinesh_iari@rediffmail.com.
(4)Division of Crop Protection, ICAR- Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, 
Lucknow, 226002, India. dinesh_iari@rediffmail.com.
(5)Division of Vegetable Science, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, 
New Delhi, 110012, India.
(6)Agriculture College, Sircilla, Professor Jayashanker Telangana State 
Agricultural University Hyderabad, Telangana, 500030, India.
(7)Indian Grassland Forage Research Institute, Regional Station, Dharwad, 
580005, Karnataka, India.
(8)Division of Plant Improvement and Pest Management, ICAR-Central Arid Zone 
Research Institute, Jodhpur, 342003, India. devendraiari@gmail.com.

Understanding the phyllomicrobiome dynamics in cauliflower plants holds 
significant promise for enhancing crop resilience against black rot disease, 
caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. In this study, the culturable 
microbiome and metagenomic profile of tolerant (BR-161) and susceptible (Pusa 
Sharad) cauliflower genotypes were investigated to elucidate microbial 
interactions associated with disease tolerance. Isolation of phyllospheric 
bacteria from asymptomatic and black rot disease symptomatic leaves of tolerant 
and susceptible cultivars yielded 46 diverse bacterial isolates. Molecular 
identification via 16S rRNA sequencing revealed differences in the diversity of 
microbial taxa between genotypes and health conditions. Metagenomic profiling 
using next-generation sequencing elucidated distinct microbial communities, with 
higher diversity observed in black rot disease symptomatic leaf of BR-161. Alpha 
and beta diversity indices highlighted differences in microbial community 
structure and composition between genotypes and health conditions. Taxonomic 
analysis revealed a core microbiome consisting of genera such as Xanthomonas, 
Psychrobacillus, Lactobacillus, and Pseudomonas across all the samples. 
Validation through microbiological methods confirmed the presence of these key 
genera. The findings provide novel insights into the phyllomicrobiome of black 
rot-tolerant and susceptible genotypes of cauliflower. Harnessing beneficial 
microbial communities identified in this study offers promising avenues for 
developing sustainable strategies to manage black rot disease and enhance 
cauliflower crop health and productivity.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-024-03969-2
PMID: 39488668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2418984. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2418984. 
Epub 2024 Oct 28.

Fecal microbial marker panel for aiding diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders.

Wan Y(1)(2)(3), Wong OWH(3)(4), Tun HM(1)(5)(6), Su Q(1)(2), Xu Z(1)(2), Tang 
W(1), Ma SL(3)(4), Chan S(3)(4), Chan FKL(1)(3)(7), Ng SC(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota I-Center (MagIC), Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)The D. H. Chen Foundation Hub of Advanced Technology for Child Health 
(HATCH), The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.
(5)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Digestive 
Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(6)The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(7)Centre for Gut Microbiota Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong SAR, China.

Accumulating evidence suggests that gut microbiota alterations influence brain 
function and could serve as diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets. The 
potential of using fecal microbiota signatures to aid autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD) detection is still not fully explored. Here, we assessed the potential of 
different levels of microbial markers (taxonomy and genome) in distinguishing 
children with ASD from age and gender-matched typically developing peers 
(n = 598, ASD vs TD = 273 vs 325). A combined microbial taxa and 
metagenome-assembled genome (MAG) markers showed a better performance than 
either microbial taxa or microbial MAGs alone for detecting ASD. A 
machine-learning model comprising 5 bacterial taxa and 44 microbial MAG markers 
(2 viral MAGs and 42 bacterial MAGs) achieved an area under the receiving 
operator curve (AUROC) of 0.886 in the discovery cohort and 0.734 in an 
independent validation cohort. Furthermore, the identified biomarkers and 
predicted ASD risk score also significantly correlated with the core symptoms 
measured by the Social Responsiveness Scale-2 (SRS-2). The microbiome panel 
showed a superior classification performance in younger children (≤6 years old) 
with an AUROC of 0.845 than older children (>6 years). The model was broadly 
applicable to subjects across genders, with or without gastrointestinal tract 
symptoms (constipation and diarrhea) and with or without psychiatric 
comorbidities (attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and anxiety). This 
study highlights the potential clinical validity of fecal microbiome to aid in 
ASD diagnosis and will facilitate studies to understand the association of 
disturbance of human gut microbiota and ASD symptom severity.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2418984
PMCID: PMC11540074
PMID: 39468837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FKLC is Board Member of CUHK Medical Centre. He 
is a co-founder, non-executive Board Chairman, non-executive scientific advisor, 
Honorary Chief Medical Officer and shareholder of GenieBiome Ltd. He receives 
patent royalties through his affiliated institutions. He has received fees as an 
advisor and honoraria as a speaker for Eisai Co. Ltd., AstraZeneca, Pfizer Inc., 
Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., and Takeda (China) Holdings Co. Ltd. SCN has served 
as an advisory board member for Pfizer, Ferring, Janssen, and Abbvie and 
received honoraria as a speaker for Ferring, Tillotts, Menarini, Janssen, 
Abbvie, and Takeda. SCN has received research grants through her affiliated 
institutions from Olympus, Ferring, and Abbvie. SCN is a founder member, 
non-executive director, non-executive scientific advisor, and shareholder of 
GenieBiome Ltd. SCN receives patent royalties through her affiliated 
institutions. QS and ZX are Scientists (Diagnostics) of GenieBiome Ltd. WT is a 
Consultant (Regulatory Affairs) of GenieBiome Ltd. YW, QS, WT, FKLC, and SCN are 
named inventors of patent applications held by the CUHK and MagIC that cover the 
therapeutic and diagnostic use of microbiome related to ASD.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Oct 13:2024.10.11.617902. doi: 
10.1101/2024.10.11.617902.

Small amounts of misassembly can have disproportionate effects on 
pangenome-based metagenomic analyses.

Majernik SN(1), Beaver L(1), Bradley PH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
(2)Infectious Diseases Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 
USA.
(3)Center of Microbiome Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 
USA.

Individual genes from microbiomes can drive host-level phenotypes. To help 
identify such candidate genes, several recent tools estimate microbial gene copy 
numbers directly from metagenomes. These tools rely on alignments to pangenomes, 
which in turn are derived from the set of all individual genomes from one 
species. While large-scale metagenomic assembly efforts have made pangenome 
estimates more complete, mixed communities can also introduce contamination into 
assemblies, and it is unknown how robust pangenome-based metagenomic analyses 
are to these errors. To gain insight into this problem, we re-analyzed a 
case-control study of the gut microbiome in cirrhosis, focusing on commensal 
Clostridia previously implicated in this disease. We tested for differentially 
prevalent genes in the Lachnospiraceae, then investigated which were likely to 
be contaminants using sequence similarity searches. Out of 86 differentially 
prevalent genes, we found that 33 (38%) were probably contaminants originating 
in taxa such as Veillonella and Haemophilus, unrelated genera that were 
independently correlated with disease status. Our results demonstrate that even 
small amounts of contamination in metagenome assemblies, below typical quality 
thresholds, can threaten to overwhelm gene-level metagenomic analyses. However, 
we also show that such contaminants can be accurately identified using a method 
based on gene-to-species correlation. After removing these contaminants, we 
observe that several flagellar motility gene clusters in the Lachnospira eligens 
pangenome are associated with cirrhosis status. We have integrated our analyses 
into an analysis and visualization pipeline, PanSweep, that can automatically 
identify cases where pangenome contamination may bias the results of 
gene-resolved analyses.
IMPORTANCE: Metagenome-assembled genomes, or MAGs, can be constructed without 
pure cultures of microbes. Large scale efforts to build MAGs have yielded more 
complete pangenomes (i.e., sets of all genes found in one species). Pangenomes 
allow us to measure strain variation in gene content, which can strongly affect 
phenotype. However, because MAGs come from mixed communities, they can 
contaminate pangenomes with unrelated DNA, and how much this impacts downstream 
analyses has not been studied. Using a metagenomic study of gut microbes in 
cirrhosis as our test case, we investigate how contamination affects analyses of 
microbial gene content. Surprisingly, even small, typical amounts of MAG 
contamination (<5%) result in disproportionately high levels of false positive 
associations (38%). Fortunately, we show that most contaminants can be 
automatically flagged, and provide a simple method for doing so. Furthermore, 
applying this method reveals a new association between cirrhosis and gut 
microbial motility.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.10.11.617902
PMCID: PMC11482961
PMID: 39416140

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 10;14(1):23701. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6.

Dysbiotic signatures and diagnostic potential of gut microbial markers for 
inflammatory bowel disease in Korean population.

Kim HS(#)(1), Oh SJ(#)(2), Kim BK(#)(3), Kim JE(2), Kim BH(4)(5), Park YK(3), 
Yang BG(3), Lee JY(6), Bae JW(7)(8)(9), Lee CK(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Research Institute, GI Biome Inc., Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Kyung Hee University 
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)East-West Medical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. gidrlee@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Fecal samples were collected from 640 individuals in Korea, including 523 
patients with IBD (223 with Crohn's disease [CD] and 300 with ulcerative colitis 
[UC]) and 117 healthy controls. The samples were subjected to cross-sectional 
gut metagenomic analysis using 16 S rRNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. 
Patients with IBD, particularly those with CD, exhibited significantly lower 
alpha diversities than the healthy subjects. Differential abundance analysis 
revealed dysbiotic signatures, characterized by an expansion of the genus 
Escherichia-Shigella in patients with CD. Functional annotations showed that 
functional pathways related to bacterial pathogenesis and production of hydrogen 
sulfide (H2S) were strongly upregulated in patients with CD. A dysbiosis score, 
calculated based on functional characteristics, highly correlated with disease 
severity. Markers distinguishing between healthy subjects and patients with IBD 
showed accurate classification based on a small number of microbial taxa, which 
may be used to diagnose ambiguous cases. These findings confirm the taxonomic 
and functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in patients with IBD, especially 
those with CD. Taxa indicative of dysbiosis may have significant implications 
for future clinical research on the management and diagnosis of IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6
PMCID: PMC11467411
PMID: 39390011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microb Ecol. 2024 Sep 28;87(1):120. doi: 10.1007/s00248-024-02435-7.

Rhizosphere Engineering of Biocontrol Agents Enriches Soil Microbial Diversity 
and Effectively Controls Root-Knot Nematodes.

Vinothini K(1), Nakkeeran S(2), Saranya N(3), Jothi P(4), Richard JI(3), Perveen 
K(5), Bukhari NA(5), Glick BR(6), Sayyed RZ(7), Mastinu A(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology, Centre for Plant Protection Studies, Tamil 
Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, 641 003, India.
(2)Department of Plant Pathology, Centre for Plant Protection Studies, Tamil 
Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore, 641 003, India. 
nakkeeranayya@tnau.ac.in.
(3)Department of Plant Molecular Biology and Bioinformatics, Centre for Plant 
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, 
Coimbatore, 641003, India.
(4)Department of Nematology, Centre for Plant Protection Studies, Tamil Nadu 
Agricultural University, Coimbatore, 641 003, India.
(5)Department of Botany & Microbiology, College of Science, King Saud 
University, P.O. Box-22452, 11495, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Biology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, N2L 3G1, Canada.
(7)Department of Biological Sciences and Chemistry, College of Arts and Science, 
University of Nizwa, Nizwa, 616, Sultanate of Oman. sayyedrz@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Division of Pharmacology, 
University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123, Brescia, Italy. 
andrea.mastinu@unibs.it.

The root-knot nematode (RKN) causes significant yield loss in tomatoes. 
Understanding the interaction of biocontrol agents (BCAs)-nematicides-soil 
microbiomes and RKNs is essential for enhancing the efficacy of biocontrol 
agents and nematicides to curb RKN damage to crops. The present study aimed to 
evaluate the in vitro effectiveness of BACa and nematicide against RKN and to 
apply the amplicon sequencing to assess the interaction of Bacillus velezensis 
(VB7) and Trichoderma koningiopsis (TK) against RKNs. Metagenomic analysis 
revealed the relative abundance of three phyla such as Proteobacteria (42.16%), 
Firmicutes (19.57%), and Actinobacteria (17.69%) in tomato rhizospheres. Those 
tomato rhizospheres treated with the combined application of B. velezensis 
VB7 + T. koningiopsis TK and RKN had a greater frequency of diversity and 
richness than the control. RKN-infested tomato rhizosphere drenched with 
bacterial and fungal antagonists had the maximum diversity index of bacterial 
communities. A strong correlation with a maximum number of interconnection edges 
in the phyla Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Actinobacteria was evident in soils 
treated with both B. velezensis VB7 and T. koningiopsis TK challenged against 
RKN in infected soil. The present study determined a much greater diversity of 
bacterial taxa observed in tomato rhizosphere soils treated with B. velezensis 
VB7 and T. koningiopsis TK than in untreated soil. It is suggested that the 
increased diversity and abundance of bacterial communities might be responsible 
for increased nematicidal properties in tomato plants. Hence, the combined 
applications of B. velezensis VB7 and T. koningiopsis TK can enhance the 
nematicidal action to curb RKN infecting tomatoes.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00248-024-02435-7
PMCID: PMC11438712
PMID: 39340684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Med. 2024 Sep 19:S2666-6340(24)00334-9. doi: 10.1016/j.medj.2024.08.003.
Online  ahead of print.

Gut microbiome pattern impacts treatment response in primary biliary 
cholangitis.

Liu Q(1), Huang B(1), Zhou Y(2), Wei Y(3), Li Y(1), Li B(1), Li Y(1), Zhang 
J(1), Qian Q(1), Chen R(1), Lyu Z(1), Wang R(1), Cao Q(4), Xu Q(4), Wang Q(1), 
Miao Q(1), You Z(1), Lian M(1), Gershwin ME(5), Jin Q(2), Xiao X(6), Ma X(7), 
Tang R(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive 
Disease, NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, State Key Laboratory for 
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Hepatology, Hangzhou Xixi Hospital Affiliated to Zhejiang 
Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Health Manage Center, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive 
Disease, NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, State Key Laboratory for 
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: xiaoxiao@renji.com.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive 
Disease, NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, State Key Laboratory for 
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, China; Institute of Aging & Tissue Regeneration, 
Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China. Electronic address: maxiongmd@hotmail.com.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Shanghai Institute of Digestive 
Disease, NHC Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, State Key Laboratory for 
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: ruqi.tang@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) is a progressive autoimmune liver 
disease. An inadequate response to ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) poses a high risk 
of progression toward end-stage liver disease. Gut dysbiosis has been implicated 
in PBC. Here, we aimed to investigate microbial signatures that permit risk 
stratification and provide mechanistic insights into novel therapies for PBC.
METHODS: We prospectively recruited UDCA treatment-naive patients with PBC and 
performed metagenomic sequencing and metabolomic profiling using stool and serum 
samples obtained before (n = 132) and after (n = 59) treatment. PBC microbiome 
subtypes were identified using unsupervised machine learning methods and 
validated in two independent cohorts.
FINDINGS: PBC baseline metagenomes clustered into two community subtypes 
characterized by varying abundances of Clostridia taxa. Compared with 
Clostridialow microbiomes, Clostridiahigh microbiomes were more similar to 
healthy controls. Notably, patients in the Clostridialow subtype exhibited a 
2-fold higher UDCA non-response rate compared to those in the Clostridiahigh 
subtype (41% vs. 20%, p = 0.015). Integrative analysis of metagenomic and 
metabolomic data revealed divergent functional modules and metabolic activities 
between the two metacommunities. In particular, anaerobic fermentation and the 
production of bioactive metabolites, including tryptophan derivatives and 
secondary bile acids, crucial for immune regulation and gut barrier maintenance, 
were markedly diminished in the Clostridialow subtype. Moreover, UDCA 
administration reconfigured the fecal microbial and metabolic profiles only in 
the Clostridiahigh group. Importantly, the microbiome subtypes and their 
associations with UDCA response were reproducible in two independent 
treatment-naive PBC cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: Characterizing baseline microbiota patterns may enable the 
prediction of treatment outcomes in PBC and facilitate personalized treatment 
strategies.
FUNDING: This research was mainly supported by the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medj.2024.08.003
PMID: 39305900

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2024 Sep 14;100(10):fiae122. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiae122.

Deciphering root-associated microbial communities in asymptomatic oil palm 
seedlings exposed to Ganoderma boninense: new insight into disease tolerance of 
oil palms.

Ho L(1), Lai C(2), Daim LDJ(1), Noh NM(1), Yap Y(1), Ibrahim J(1), Teh C(1).

Author information:
(1)SD Guthrie Technology Centre Sdn Bhd, 1st Floor Block B, UPM-MTDC Technology 
Centre III, Serdang, 43400, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Inong Agriculture Co., Ltd., 3F, 48 Fuxing North Road Zhongshan district, 
Taipei, 104102, Republic of China.

Understanding the microbial communities in asymptomatic oil palm seedlings is 
crucial for developing disease-suppressive microbiota against basal stem rot 
(BSR) in oil palm. In this study, we compared the microbial communities in bulk 
soil, rhizosphere, and endosphere of control, asymptomatic, and symptomatic 
seedlings following inoculation with Ganoderma boninense. Our findings revealed 
significant shifts in microbial structure and interactions, particularly in 
asymptomatic seedlings. Both Actinobacteriota and Ascomycota were notably 
enriched in these samples, with Actinobacteriota identified as keystone taxa. 
Long-read shotgun metagenomics demonstrated that 67.4% of enriched 
Actinobacteriota taxa were unique to asymptomatic seedlings. Similarly, 
Ascomycota members showed significant enrichment, suggesting their potential 
role in BSR suppression. The consistent identification of these phyla across 
various analyses underscores their importance in disease resistance. This is the 
first report detailing the shifts in prokaryotic and fungal communities in 
asymptomatic and symptomatic seedlings, offering insights into potential 
disease-suppressive taxa across three compartments: bulk soil, rhizosphere, and 
endosphere of oil palm seedlings.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiae122
PMCID: PMC11460286
PMID: 39264053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

1. Pharmacol Res. 2024 Oct;208:107385. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107385. Epub 2024
 Sep 6.

Multi-omics analysis of gut-brain axis reveals novel microbial and 
neurotransmitter signatures in patients with arteriosclerotic cerebral small 
vessel disease.

Huang J(1), Liu S(2), Li P(1), Wei L(2), Lin G(1), Lin J(2), Luo Y(1), Liu Y(2), 
Mao Y(1), Ruan H(2), Qin B(2), Fan P(2), Lu T(2), Cai W(2), Yi H(2), Mou X(3), 
Lu Z(4), Zhao W(5), Wu A(6).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Inflammatory Diseases, School 
of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518107, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Center for the Study of Mental and Neurological 
Disorders, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China.
(3)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Inflammatory Diseases, School 
of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518107, China. Electronic address: mouxy5@ms.sysu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Neurology, Center for the Study of Mental and Neurological 
Disorders, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China. Electronic address: 
luzhq@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(5)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Inflammatory Diseases, School 
of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 
518107, China. Electronic address: zhaowj29@ms.sysu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Neurology, Center for the Study of Mental and Neurological 
Disorders, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China. Electronic address: 
wuaimin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Arteriosclerotic cerebral small vessel disease (aCSVD) is a major cause of 
stroke and dementia. Although its underlying pathogenesis remains poorly 
understood, both inflammaging and gut microbiota dysbiosis have been 
hypothesized to play significant roles. This study investigated the role of gut 
microbiota in the pathogenesis of aCSVD through a comparative analysis of the 
gut microbiome and metabolome between CSVD patients and healthy controls. The 
results showed that patients with aCSVD exhibited a marked reduction in 
potentially beneficial bacterial species, such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzli 
and Roseburia intestinalis, alongside an increase in taxa from Bacteroides and 
Proteobacteria. Integrated metagenomic and metabolomic analyses revealed that 
alterations in microbial metabolic pathways, including LPS biosynthesis and 
phenylalanine-tyrosine metabolism, were associated with the status of aCSVD. Our 
findings indicated that microbial LPS biosynthesis and phenylalanine-tyrosine 
metabolism potentially influenced the symptoms and progression of aCSVD via 
pro-inflammatory effect and modulation of systemic neurotransmitters, 
respectively. These results imply that gut microbiota characteristics may serve 
as indicators for early detection of aCSVD and as potential gut-directed 
therapeutic intervention target.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2024.107385
PMID: 39245190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.

1. mSystems. 2024 Oct 22;9(10):e0130323. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01303-23. Epub
2024  Sep 6.

Unfolding and de-confounding: biologically meaningful causal inference from 
longitudinal multi-omic networks using METALICA.

Ruiz-Perez D(1), Gimon I(1), Sazal M(1), Mathee K(2)(3), Narasimhan G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research Group (BioRG), Florida International University, 
Miami, Florida, USA.
(2)Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA.
(3)Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida International University, Miami, 
Florida, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Dec 13:2023.12.12.571384. doi: 10.1101/2023.12.12.571384.

A key challenge in the analysis of microbiome data is the integration of 
multi-omic datasets and the discovery of interactions between microbial taxa, 
their expressed genes, and the metabolites they consume and/or produce. In an 
effort to improve the state of the art in inferring biologically meaningful 
multi-omic interactions, we sought to address some of the most fundamental 
issues in causal inference from longitudinal multi-omics microbiome data sets. 
We developed METALICA, a suite of tools and techniques that can infer 
interactions between microbiome entities. METALICA introduces novel unrolling 
and de-confounding techniques used to uncover multi-omic entities that are 
believed to act as confounders for some of the relationships that may be 
inferred using standard causal inferencing tools. The results lend support to 
predictions about biological models and processes by which microbial taxa 
interact with each other in a microbiome. The unrolling process helps identify 
putative intermediaries (genes and/or metabolites) to explain the interactions 
between microbes; the de-confounding process identifies putative common causes 
that may lead to spurious relationships to be inferred. METALICA was applied to 
the networks inferred by existing causal discovery, and network inference 
algorithms were applied to a multi-omics data set resulting from a longitudinal 
study of IBD microbiomes. The most significant unrollings and de-confoundings 
were manually validated using the existing literature and databases.
IMPORTANCE: We have developed a suite of tools and techniques capable of 
inferring interactions between microbiome entities. METALICA introduces novel 
techniques called unrolling and de-confounding that are employed to uncover 
multi-omic entities considered to be confounders for some of the relationships 
that may be inferred using standard causal inferencing tools. To evaluate our 
method, we conducted tests on the inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) dataset from 
the iHMP longitudinal study, which we pre-processed in accordance with our 
previous work. From this dataset, we generated various subsets, encompassing 
different combinations of metagenomics, metabolomics, and metatranscriptomics 
datasets. Using these multi-omics datasets, we demonstrate how the unrolling 
process aids in the identification of putative intermediaries (genes and/or 
metabolites) to explain the interactions between microbes. Additionally, the 
de-confounding process identifies potential common causes that may give rise to 
spurious relationships to be inferred. The most significant unrollings and 
de-confoundings were manually validated using the existing literature and 
databases.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01303-23
PMCID: PMC11494969
PMID: 39240096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microb Genom. 2024 Sep;10(9):001289. doi: 10.1099/mgen.0.001289.

Infectious bronchitis virus vaccination, but not the presence of XCR1, is 
correlated with large differences in chicken caecal microbiota.

Glendinning L(1), Wu Z(1), Vervelde L(1)(2), Watson M(3)(4), Balic A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Royal GD Animal Health, Deventer, Netherlands.
(3)Centre for Digital Innovation, DSM Biotechnology Centre, Delft, Netherlands.
(4)Scotland's Rural College, Peter Wilson Building, King's Buildings, Edinburgh, 
UK.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

The chicken immune system and microbiota play vital roles in maintaining gut 
homeostasis and protecting against pathogens. In mammals, XCR1+ conventional 
dendritic cells (cDCs) are located in the gut-draining lymph nodes and play a 
major role in gut homeostasis. These cDCs sample antigens in the gut luminal 
contents and limit the inflammatory response to gut commensal microbes by 
generating appropriate regulatory and effector T-cell responses. We hypothesized 
that these cells play similar roles in sustaining gut homeostasis in chickens, 
and that chickens lacking XCR1 were likely to contain a dysbiotic caecal 
microbiota. Here we compare the caecal microbiota of chickens that were either 
heterozygous or homozygous XCR1 knockouts, that had or had not been vaccinated 
for infectious bronchitis virus (IBV). We used short-read (Illumina) and 
long-read (PacBio HiFi) metagenomic sequencing to reconstruct 670 high-quality, 
strain-level metagenome assembled genomes. We found no significant differences 
between alpha diversity or the abundance of specific microbial taxa between 
genotypes. However, IBV vaccination was found to correlate with significant 
differences in the richness and beta diversity of the microbiota, and to the 
abundance of 40 bacterial genera. In conclusion, we found that a lack of XCR1 
was not correlated with significant changes in the chicken microbiota, but IBV 
vaccination was.

DOI: 10.1099/mgen.0.001289
PMCID: PMC11541229
PMID: 39222347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.

1. Parasit Vectors. 2024 Aug 31;17(1):370. doi: 10.1186/s13071-024-06442-y.

Metagenome reveals the midgut microbial community of Haemaphysalis qinghaiensis 
ticks collected from yaks and Tibetan sheep.

Zhang Y(1), Cheng TY(1), Liu GH(1), Liu L(1), Duan DY(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, 410128, Hunan Province, China.
(2)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, 410128, Hunan Province, China. 
kakayuan0980@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Haemaphysalis qinghaiensis is a tick species distributed only in 
China. Due to its ability to transmit a variety of pathogens, including species 
of the genera Anaplasma, Rickettsia, Babesia, and Theileria, it seriously 
endangers livestock husbandry. However, the microbial community of the midgut of 
H. qinghaiensis females collected from yaks and Tibetan sheep has not yet been 
characterized using metagenomic sequencing technology.
METHODS: Haemaphysalis qinghaiensis were collected from the skins of yaks and 
Tibetan sheep in Gansu Province, China. Genomic DNA was extracted from the 
midguts and midgut contents of fully engorged H. qinghaiensis females collected 
from the two hosts. Metagenomic sequencing technology was used to analyze the 
microbial community of the two groups.
RESULTS: Fifty-seven phyla, 483 genera, and 755 species were identified in the 
two groups of samples. The ticks from the two hosts harbored common and unique 
microorganisms. At the phylum level, the dominant common phyla were 
Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Mucoromycota. At the genus level, the dominant 
common genera were Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, and Pseudomonas. At the species level, 
bacteria including Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia minasensis, and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa along with eukaryotes such as Synchytrium endobioticum 
and Rhizophagus irregularis, and viruses such as the orf virus, Alphadintovirus 
mayetiola, and Parasteatoda house spider adintovirus were detected in both 
groups. In addition, the midgut of H. qinghaiensis collected from yaks had 
unique microbial taxa including two phyla, eight genera, and 23 species. Unique 
microorganisms in the midgut of H. qinghaiensis collected from Tibetan sheep 
included two phyla, 14 genera, and 32 species. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes enrichment analysis revealed that the functional genes of the microbiome 
of H. qinghaiensis were annotated to six pathways, and the metabolic pathways 
included 11 metabolic processes, in which the genes involved in carbohydrate 
metabolism were the most abundant, followed by the genes involved in lipid 
metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that most of the microbial species in the 
collected H. qinghaiensis ticks were the same in both hosts, but there were also 
slight differences. The analytical data from this study have enhanced our 
understanding of the midgut microbial composition of H. qinghaiensis collected 
from different hosts. The database of H. qinghaiensis microbe constructed from 
this study will lay the foundation for predicting tick-borne diseases. 
Furthermore, a comprehensive understanding of tick microbiomes will be useful 
for understanding vector competency and interactions with ticks and midgut 
microorganisms.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-024-06442-y
PMCID: PMC11366167
PMID: 39217389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. mBio. 2024 Oct 16;15(10):e0206324. doi: 10.1128/mbio.02063-24. Epub 2024 Aug
29.

Metagenomic discovery of microbial eukaryotes in stool microbiomes.

Crouch AL(1), Monsey L(1), Rambeau M(1), Ramos C(1), Yracheta JM(2), Anderson 
MZ(1)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(2)Native BioData Consortium, Eagle Butte, South Dakota, USA.
(3)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, Ohio, USA.
(4)Center for Genomic Science Innovation, University of Wisconsin - Madison, 
Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Genetics, University of Wisconsin - Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Host-associated microbiota form complex microbial communities that are 
increasingly associated with host behavior and disease. While these microbes 
include bacterial, archaeal, viral, and eukaryotic constituents, most studies 
have focused on bacteria due to their dominance in the human host and available 
tools for investigation. Accumulating evidence suggests microbial eukaryotes in 
the microbiome play pivotal roles in host health, but our understandings of 
these interactions are limited to a few readily identifiable taxa because of 
technical limitations in unbiased eukaryote exploration. Here, we combined cell 
sorting, optimized eukaryotic cell lysis, and shotgun sequencing to accelerate 
metagenomic discovery and analysis of host-associated microbial eukaryotes. 
Using synthetic communities with a 1% microbial eukaryote representation, the 
eukaryote-optimized cell lysis and DNA recovery method alone yielded a 38-fold 
increase in eukaryotic DNA. Automated sorting of eukaryotic cells from stool 
samples of healthy adults increased the number of microbial eukaryote reads in 
metagenomic pools by up to 28-fold compared to commercial kits. Read frequencies 
for identified fungi increased by 10,000× on average compared to the Human 
Microbiome Project and allowed for the identification of novel taxa, de novo 
assembly of contigs from previously unknown microbial eukaryotes, and gene 
prediction from recovered genomic segments. These advances pave the way for the 
unbiased inclusion of microbial eukaryotes in deciphering determinants of health 
and disease in the host-associated microbiome.IMPORTANCEMicrobial eukaryotes are 
common constituents of the human gut where they can contribute to local ecology 
and host health, but they are often overlooked in microbiome studies. The lack 
of attention is due to current technical limitations that are heavily biased or 
poorly recovered DNA from microbial eukaryotes. We developed a method to 
increase the representation of these eukaryotes in metagenomic sequencing of 
microbiome samples that allows to improve their detection compared to prior 
methods and allows for the identification of new species. Application of the 
technique to gut microbiome samples improved detection of fungi, protists, and 
helminths. New eukaryotic taxa and their encoded genes could be identified by 
sequencing a small number of samples. This approach can improve the inclusion of 
eukaryotes into microbiome research.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.02063-24
PMCID: PMC11481512
PMID: 39207108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.Z.A. is a board member of the Native BioData 
Consortium.

1. Pathogens. 2024 Aug 7;13(8):665. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13080665.

Diversity of Free-Living Amoebae in New Zealand Groundwater and Their Ability to 
Feed on Legionella pneumophila.

Ariyadasa S(1), van Hamelsveld S(1), Taylor W(1), Lin S(1), Sitthirit P(1), Pang 
L(1), Billington C(1), Weaver L(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Science and Research, 27 Creyke Road, Ilam, 
Christchurch 8041, New Zealand.

Free-living amoebae (FLA) are common in both natural and engineered freshwater 
ecosystems. They play important roles in biofilm control and contaminant removal 
through the predation of bacteria and other taxa. Bacterial predation by FLA is 
also thought to contribute to pathogen dispersal and infectious disease 
transmission in freshwater environments via the egestion of viable bacteria. 
Despite their importance in shaping freshwater microbial communities, the 
diversity and function of FLA in many freshwater ecosystems are poorly 
understood. In this study, we isolated and characterized FLA from two 
groundwater sites in Canterbury, New Zealand using microbiological, microscopic, 
and molecular techniques. Different methods for groundwater FLA isolation and 
enrichment were trialed and optimized. The ability of these isolated FLA to 
predate on human pathogen Legionella pneumophila was assessed. FLA were 
identified by 18S metagenomic amplicon sequencing. Our study showed that 
Acanthamoeba spp. (including A. polyphaga) and Vermamoeba veriformis were the 
main FLA species present in both groundwater sites examined. While most of the 
isolated FLA co-existed with L. pneumophila, the FLA populations in the L. 
pneumophila co-culture experiments predominantly consisted of A. polyphaga, 
Acanthamoeba spp., Naegleria spp., V. vermiformis, Paravahlkampfia spp., and 
Echinamoeba spp. These observations suggest that FLA may have the potential to 
act as reservoirs for L. pneumophila in Canterbury, New Zealand groundwater 
systems and could be introduced into the local drinking water infrastructure, 
where they may promote the survival, multiplication, and dissemination of 
Legionella. This research addresses an important gap in our understanding of 
FLA-mediated pathogen dispersal in freshwater ecosystems.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13080665
PMCID: PMC11357516
PMID: 39204265

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 
The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, 
or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision 
to publish the results.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2393756. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2393756. 
Epub 2024 Aug 28.

Consistent signatures in the human gut microbiome of longevous populations.

Chen S(1)(2), Zhang Z(3), Liu S(4), Chen T(3), Lu Z(4), Zhao W(1), Mou X(1), Liu 
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Inflammatory Diseases, School 
of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 
China.
(2)Department of Pathology, the Seven Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, Guangdong, China.
(3)Research and Development Center, Center of Human Microecology Engineering and 
Technology of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Gut microbiota of centenarians has garnered significant attention in recent 
years, with most studies concentrating on the analysis of microbial composition. 
However, there is still limited knowledge regarding the consistent signatures of 
specific species and their biological functions, as well as the potential causal 
relationship between gut microbiota and longevity. To address this, we performed 
the fecal metagenomic analysis of eight longevous populations at the species and 
functional level, and employed the Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to 
infer the causal associations between microbial taxa and longevity-related 
traits. We observed that several species including Eisenbergiella tayi, 
Methanobrevibacter smithii, Hungatella hathewayi, and Desulfovibrio 
fairfieldensis were consistently enriched in the gut microbiota of long-lived 
individuals compared to younger elderly and young adults across multiple 
cohorts. Analysis of microbial pathways and enzymes indicated that E. tayi plays 
a role in the protein N-glycosylation, while M. smithii is involved in the 
3-dehydroquinate and chorismate biosynthesis. Furthermore, H. hathewayi makes a 
distinct contribution to the purine nucleobase degradation I pathway, 
potentially assisting the elderly in maintaining purine homeostasis. D. 
fairfieldensis contributes to the menaquinone (vitamin K2) biosynthesis, which 
may help prevent age-related diseases such as osteoporosis-induced fractures. 
According to MR results, Hungatella was significantly positively correlated with 
parental longevity, and Desulfovibrio also exhibited positive associations with 
lifespan and multiple traits related to parental longevity. Additionally, 
Alistipes and Akkermansia muciniphila were consistently enriched in the gut 
microbiota of the three largest cohorts of long-lived individuals, and MR 
analysis also suggests their potential causal relationships with longevity. Our 
findings reveal longevity-associated gut microbial signatures, which are 
informative for understanding the role of microbiota in regulating longevity and 
aging.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2393756
PMCID: PMC11364081
PMID: 39197040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. mSystems. 2024 Sep 17;9(9):e0074624. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00746-24. Epub 2024
 Aug 13.

Refining microbial community metabolic models derived from metagenomics using 
reference-based taxonomic profiling.

Majzoub ME(1), Luu LDW(1), Haifer C(2)(3), Paramsothy S(4)(5), Borody TJ(6), 
Leong RW(4)(5), Thomas T(7), Kaakoush NO(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(2)School of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health, UNSW Sydney, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(4)Concord Clinical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Concord Repatriation General Hospital, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Centre for Digestive Diseases, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(7)Centre for Marine Science and Innovation, School of Biological, Earth and 
Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.

Characterization of microbial community metabolic output is crucial to 
understanding their functions. Construction of genome-scale metabolic models 
from metagenome-assembled genomes (MAG) has enabled prediction of metabolite 
production by microbial communities, yet little is known about their accuracy. 
Here, we examined the performance of two approaches for metabolite prediction 
from metagenomes, one that is MAG-guided and another that is taxonomic 
reference-guided. We applied both on shotgun metagenomics data from human and 
environmental samples, and validated findings in the human samples using 
untargeted metabolomics. We found that in human samples, where taxonomic 
profiling is optimized and reference genomes are readily available, when number 
of input taxa was normalized, the reference-guided approach predicted more 
metabolites than the MAG-guided approach. The two approaches showed significant 
overlap but each identified metabolites not predicted in the other. Pathway 
enrichment analyses identified significant differences in inferences derived 
from data based on the approach, highlighting the need for caution in 
interpretation. In environmental samples, when the number of input taxa was 
normalized, the reference-guided approach predicted more metabolites than the 
MAG-guided approach for total metabolites in both sample types and non-redundant 
metabolites in seawater samples. Nonetheless, as was observed for the human 
samples, the approaches overlapped substantially but also predicted metabolites 
not observed in the other. Our findings report on utility of a complementary 
input to genome-scale metabolic model construction that is less computationally 
intensive forgoing MAG assembly and refinement, and that can be applied on 
shallow shotgun sequencing where MAGs cannot be generated.IMPORTANCELittle is 
known about the accuracy of genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) of microbial 
communities despite their influence on inferring community metabolic outputs and 
culture conditions. The performance of GEMs for metabolite prediction from 
metagenomes was assessed by applying two approaches on shotgun metagenomics data 
from human and environmental samples, and validating findings in the human 
samples using untargeted metabolomics. The performance of the approach was found 
to be dependent on sample type, but collectively, the reference-guided approach 
predicted more metabolites than the MAG-guided approach. Despite the 
differences, the predictions from the approaches overlapped substantially but 
each identified metabolites not predicted in the other. We found significant 
differences in biological inferences based on the approach, with some examples 
of uniquely enriched pathways in one group being invalidated when using the 
alternative approach, highlighting the need for caution in interpretation of 
GEMs.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00746-24
PMCID: PMC11406951
PMID: 39136455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.P. has served as a consultant for Finch 
Therapeutics and has received speaker fees from Ferring, Janssen, and Takeda. 
T.J.B. has a pecuniary interest in the Centre for Digestive Diseases, is a 
medical advisor to Finch Therapeutics, RedHill Bio, and Topelia Aust, and holds 
patents in FMT treatment. All other authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2024 Aug 10:jjae125. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjae125. Online 
ahead of print.

Specific bacterial co-abundance groups are associated with inflammatory status 
in patients with ulcerative colitis.

Jangi S(1), Zhao N(2), Hsia K(1), Park YS(3), Michaud DS(2), Yoon H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Tufts University School of Medicine, Public Health and Community Medicine, 
Boston, MA United States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: While there is increasing interest in microbiome-directed 
therapies for patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), the identification of 
microbial targets remains elusive, underlining the need for novel approaches.
METHODS: Utilizing metagenomic data from the Study of a Prospective Adult 
Research Cohort with Inflammatory Bowel Disease, available via the IBD Plexus 
Program of the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation, we used a tree-based dichotomous 
approach to assemble distinct clusters of species-level bacterial co-abundance 
groups (CAGs). We evaluated the abundance of bacterial CAGs and fungal taxa 
during remission (n=166) and activity (n=46). We examined if the bacterial CAGs 
identified in our cohorts were conserved in 2 healthy cohorts and in a Korean UC 
cohort.
RESULTS: CAG3 and CAG8, dominated by bacteria from family Lachnospiraceae, were 
associated with remission. Low CAG8 and elevated Candida genus were predictive 
of active UC. Constituents from CAG8 were influential hub species of the 
remission-associated microbial UC network, including Ruminococcus gnavus, 
Erysipelatoclostridium ramosum, Blautia and Dorea species. These hub species 
interactions were preserved in 2 healthy cohorts and were partially 
recapitulated in a Korean UC cohort. CAG8 abundance correlated with the 
secondary bile acid production pathway. Bacterial CAGs did not correlate with 
Candida, however Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Alistipes putredinis were 
negatively associated with Candida.
CONCLUSIONS: Lachnospiriceae-dominated bacterial CAGs were associated with 
remission in UC, with key bacterial interactions within the CAG also observed in 
2 healthy cohorts and a Korean UC cohort. Bacterial CAG-based analyses may help 
to inform the design of candidate consortia for microbiome-based therapeutics.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjae125
PMID: 39126385

1. Curr Genomics. 2024 May 31;25(3):226-235. doi: 
10.2174/0113892029302230240319042208. Epub 2024 Mar 20.

Genomic and Metagenomic Insights into the Distribution of Nicotine-degrading 
Enzymes in Human Microbiota.

Guan Y(1), Zhu Z(1), Peng Q(1), Li M(1), Li X(2), Yang JW(2), Lu YH(2), Wang 
M(2), Xie BB(2).

Author information:
(1)Joint Institute of Tobacco and Health, Kunming, 650106, Yunnan, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Institute of Microbial 
Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, 266237, China.

INTRODUCTION: Nicotine degradation is a new strategy to block nicotine-induced 
pathology. The potential of human microbiota to degrade nicotine has not been 
explored.
AIMS: This study aimed to uncover the genomic potentials of human microbiota to 
degrade nicotine.
METHODS: To address this issue, we performed a systematic annotation of 
Nicotine-Degrading Enzymes (NDEs) from genomes and metagenomes of human 
microbiota. A total of 26,295 genomes and 1,596 metagenomes for human microbiota 
were downloaded from public databases and five types of NDEs were annotated with 
a custom pipeline. We found 959 NdhB, 785 NdhL, 987 NicX, three NicA1, and three 
NicA2 homologs.
RESULTS: Genomic classification revealed that six phylum-level taxa, including 
Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, Firmicutes_A, Bacteroidota, Actinobacteriota, and 
Chloroflexota, can produce NDEs, with Proteobacteria encoding all five types of 
NDEs studied. Analysis of NicX prevalence revealed differences among body sites. 
NicX homologs were found in gut and oral samples with a high prevalence but not 
found in lung samples. NicX was found in samples from both smokers and 
non-smokers, though the prevalence might be different.
CONCLUSION: This study represents the first systematic investigation of NDEs 
from the human microbiota, providing new insights into the physiology and 
ecological functions of human microbiota and shedding new light on the 
development of nicotine-degrading probiotics for the treatment of 
smoking-related diseases.

Bentham Science Publishers.

DOI: 10.2174/0113892029302230240319042208
PMCID: PMC11288164
PMID: 39086996

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest, 
financial or otherwise.

1. R Soc Open Sci. 2024 Jul 10;11(7):240108. doi: 10.1098/rsos.240108.
eCollection  2024 Jul.

Metagenomic profiling of nasopharyngeal samples from adults with acute 
respiratory infection.

Sandybayev N(1), Beloussov V(1)(2), Strochkov V(1), Solomadin M(3), Granica 
J(2), Yegorov S(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Kazakhstan-Japan Innovation Centre, Kazakh National Agrarian Research 
University (KazNARU), Almaty, Kazakhstan.
(2)TreeGene Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Almaty, Kazakhstan.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Karaganda Medical University, Karaganda, Kazakhstan.
(4)Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster 
Immunology Research Centre; Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Biology, School of Sciences and Humanities, Nazarbayev 
University, Astana, Kazakhstan.

Diagnosis of acute respiratory infections (ARIs) is challenging due to the broad 
diversity of potential microbial causes. We used metagenomic next-generation 
sequencing (mNGS) to analyze the nasopharyngeal virome of ARI patients, who had 
undergone testing with a clinical multiplex PCR panel (Amplisens 
ARVI-screen-FRT). We collected nasopharyngeal swabs from 49 outpatient adults, 
32 of whom had ARI symptoms and were PCR-positive, and 4 asymptomatic controls 
in Kazakhstan during Spring 2021. We assessed the biodiversity of the 
mNGS-derived virome and concordance with PCR results. PCR identified common ARI 
viruses in 65% of the symptomatic cases. mNGS revealed viral taxa consisting of 
human, non-human eukaryotic and bacteriophage groups, comprising 15, 11 and 28 
genera, respectively. Notable ARI-associated human viruses included rhinovirus 
(16.3%), betaherpesvirus 7 (14.3%) and Epstein-Barr virus (8.16%). The primary 
phage hosts were Streptococcus spp. (32.7%), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (24.5%) and 
Burkholderia spp. (20.4%). In total, 47% of ARIs were linked solely to bacterial 
pathogens, a third to viral-bacterial co-infections, and less than 10% to only 
viral infections by mNGS. PCR showed low concordance with mNGS, except for 
rhinovirus. These results underscore the importance of broad diagnostic methods 
and question the effectiveness of commonly used PCR panels in ARI diagnosis.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1098/rsos.240108
PMCID: PMC11286146
PMID: 39076360

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Jun 21;12(7):1260. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12071260.

Deciphering Microbial Composition in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease: 
Implications for Therapeutic Response to Biologic Agents.

Palmieri O(1), Bossa F(1), Castellana S(2), Latiano T(1), Carparelli S(1), 
Martino G(1), Mangoni M(2)(3), Corritore G(1), Nardella M(1), Guerra M(1), 
Biscaglia G(1), Perri F(1), Mazza T(2), Latiano A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Endoscopy, Fondazione IRCCS "Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza", 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(2)Unit of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", 
71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.

Growing evidence suggests that alterations in the gut microbiome impact the 
development of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), including Crohn's disease 
(CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Although IBD often requires the use of 
immunosuppressant drugs and biologic therapies to facilitate clinical remission 
and mucosal healing, some patients do not benefit from these drugs, and the 
reasons for this remain poorly understood. Despite advancements, there is still 
a need to develop biomarkers to help predict prognosis and guide treatment 
decisions. The aim of this study was to investigate the gut microbiome of IBD 
patients using biologics to identify microbial signatures associated with 
responses, following standard accepted criteria. Microbiomes in 66 stool samples 
from 39 IBD patients, comprising 20 CD and 19 UC patients starting biologic 
therapies, and 29 samples from healthy controls (HCs) were prospectively 
analyzed via NGS and an ensemble of metagenomics analysis tools. At baseline, 
differences were observed in alpha and beta metrics among patients with CD, UC 
and HC, as well as between the CD and UC groups. The degree of dysbiosis was 
more pronounced in CD patients, and those with dysbiosis exhibited a limited 
response to biological drugs. Pairwise differential abundance analyses revealed 
an increasing trend in the abundance of an unannotated genus from the 
Clostridiales order, Gemmiger genus and an unannotated genus from the 
Rikenellaceae family, which were consistently identified in greater abundance in 
HC. The Clostridium genus was more abundant in CD patients. At baseline, a 
greater abundance of the Odoribacter and Ruminococcus genera was found in IBD 
patients who responded to biologics at 14 weeks, whereas a genus identified as 
SMB53 was more enriched at 52 weeks. The Collinsella genus showed a higher 
prevalence among non-responder IBD patients. Additionally, a greater abundance 
of an unclassified genus from the Barnesiellaceae family and one from 
Lachnospiraceae was observed in IBD patients responding to Vedolizumab at 14 
weeks. Our analyses showed global microbial diversity, mainly in CD. This 
indicated the absence or depletion of key taxa responsible for producing 
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). We also identified an abundance of pathobiont 
microbes in IBD patients at baseline, particularly in non-responders to biologic 
therapies. Furthermore, specific bacteria-producing SCFAs were abundant in 
patients responding to biologics and in those responding to Vedolizumab.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12071260
PMCID: PMC11278628
PMID: 39065032

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Genes (Basel). 2024 Jun 21;15(7):824. doi: 10.3390/genes15070824.

Soil Microbial Communities in Lemon Orchards Affected by Citrus Mal Secco 
Disease.

Mosca A(1), Dimaria G(1), Nicotra D(1), Modica F(1), Massimino ME(1), Catara 
AF(2), Scuderi G(2), Russo M(2), Catara V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agriculture, Food and Environment, University of Catania, 95123 
Catania, Italy.
(2)Agrobiotech Soc. Coop., 95121 Catania, Italy.

Mal secco is a vascular disease of citrus caused by the mitosporic fungus 
Plenodomus tracheiphilus. Soil containing infected plant material constitutes an 
inoculum source for root infections. In this study, the soil bacterial and 
fungal communities of five lemon orchards located in Syracuse Province (Sicily, 
Italy) affected by mal secco were analyzed. Soil samples were collected under 
lemon tree canopies and subjected to total genomic DNA extraction. The fungal 
DNA was detected through qPCR in all orchards, with variable concentrations. 
Bacterial and fungal communities were profiled using 16S and ITS amplicon-based 
high-throughput sequencing, respectively. According to our results, the relative 
abundances of the most represented bacterial phyla (e.g., Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteriota, Acidobacteriota) changed across the orchards, while in the 
fungal community, the phylum Ascomycota was dominant, with Basidiomycota and 
Mortierellomycota abundances fluctuating. On the whole, β diversity analysis 
showed significant variation in the composition of the soil microbial 
communities across the orchards. This result was confirmed by the analysis of 
the core community (taxa present at ≥ 75% of total samples), where putative 
beneficial bacteria resulted in significantly enriched fungus-infected soil 
samples, suggesting complex microbial interactions. Our findings shed light on 
the composition and diversity of the soil microbiome in lemon orchards with the 
occurrence of mal secco infections.

DOI: 10.3390/genes15070824
PMCID: PMC11276235
PMID: 39062603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. A. 
Mosca, G. Dimaria, D. Nicotra, F. Modica, M. E. Massimino, V. Catara from 
University of Catania and A. F. Catara, G. Scuderi, M. Russo from Agrobiotech 
Soc. Coop. declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be constructed as a potential 
conflict of interest.

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2024 Dec;76(12):1758-1763. doi: 10.1002/art.42956. Epub 
2024 Aug 9.

Gut Microbiome and Osteoarthritis: Insights From the Naturally Occurring Canine 
Model of Osteoarthritis.

Stevens C(1), Norris S(1), Arbeeva L(2), Carter S(3), Enomoto M(1), Nelson 
AE(4), Lascelles BDX(5).

Author information:
(1)Translational Research in Pain, College of Veterinary Medicine, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina.
(2)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill.
(3)Phibrio Animal Health, Teaneck, New Jersey.
(4)Thurston Arthritis Research Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill and Gillings School of Global Public Health, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill.
(5)Translational Research in Pain, College of Veterinary Medicine, North 
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, Thurston Arthritis Research 
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Comparative Pain Research 
and Education Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, 
and the Center for Translational Pain Research, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study was to enhance the current knowledge of the 
relationship between the gut microbiome and osteoarthritis (OA) and associated 
pain using pet dogs as a clinically relevant translational model.
METHODS: Fecal samples were collected from 93 owned pet dogs. Dogs were 
designated as either clinically healthy or OA pain using validated methods. 
Metagenomic profiling was performed through shotgun sequencing using the 
Illumina NovaSeq platform. MetaPhlAn2 and HUMAnN2 were used to evaluate 
bacterial taxonomic and pathway relative abundance. Comparisons between healthy 
and OA-pain groups were performed individually for each taxa using nonparametric 
tests following Benjamini and Hochberg adjustment for multiple comparisons. 
Permutation analysis of variance was performed using Bray-Curtis distance 
matrices. All downstream analyses were completed in R.
RESULTS: No significant differences between healthy and OA-pain dogs were 
observed for alpha and beta diversity. We found 13 taxa with nominally 
significant (P < 0.05) associations with OA case status, but none of the 
associations remained significant after adjustment for multiple comparisons. No 
differences in alpha or beta diversities or the Firmicutes to Bacteroidetes 
ratio were found regarding pain severity, mobility or activity level, age, or 
body composition score.
CONCLUSION: Similar to recent studies in humans, the present study did not 
demonstrate a significant difference in the fecal microbial communities between 
dogs with OA pain and healthy control dogs. Future research in this naturally 
occurring model should expand on these data and relate the gut microbiome to gut 
permeability and circulating proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory molecules to 
better understand the influence of the gut microbiome on OA and OA pain.

© 2024 The Author(s). Arthritis & Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals 
LLC on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.42956
PMCID: PMC11605265
PMID: 39030898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Microbiome. 2024 Jul 18;12(1):129. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01823-y.

House dust metagenome and pulmonary function in a US farming population.

Lee M(1), Kaul A(2), Ward JM(3), Zhu Q(4)(5), Richards M(6), Wang Z(7), González 
A(8), Parks CG(9), Beane Freeman LE(10), Umbach DM(7), Motsinger-Reif AA(7), 
Knight R(8)(11)(12)(13), London SJ(9).

Author information:
(1)Immunity Inflammation and Disease Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, 27709, USA. 
mikyeong.lee@nih.gov.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA, USA.
(3)Integrative Bioinformatics Support Group, NIEHS, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(5)Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(6), Westat, Durham, NC, USA.
(7)Biostatistics and Computational Biology Branch, NIEHS, Durham, NC, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
USA.
(9)Immunity Inflammation and Disease Laboratory, National Institute of 
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS), Durham, NC, 27709, USA.
(10)Occupational and Environmental Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer 
Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, USA.
(11)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(13)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Chronic exposure to microorganisms inside homes can impact 
respiratory health. Few studies have used advanced sequencing methods to examine 
adult respiratory outcomes, especially continuous measures. We aimed to identify 
metagenomic profiles in house dust related to the quantitative traits of 
pulmonary function and airway inflammation in adults. Microbial communities, 
1264 species (389 genera), in vacuumed bedroom dust from 779 homes in a US 
cohort were characterized by whole metagenome shotgun sequencing. We examined 
two overall microbial diversity measures: richness (the number of individual 
microbial species) and Shannon index (reflecting both richness and relative 
abundance). To identify specific differentially abundant genera, we applied the 
Lasso estimator with high-dimensional inference methods, a novel framework for 
analyzing microbiome data in relation to continuous traits after accounting for 
all taxa examined together.
RESULTS: Pulmonary function measures (forced expiratory volume in one second 
(FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC), and FEV1/FVC ratio) were not associated 
with overall dust microbial diversity. However, many individual microbial genera 
were differentially abundant (p-value < 0.05 controlling for all other microbial 
taxa examined) in relation to FEV1, FVC, or FEV1/FVC. Similarly, fractional 
exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO), a marker of airway inflammation, was unrelated to 
overall microbial diversity but associated with differential abundance for many 
individual genera. Several genera, including Limosilactobacillus, were 
associated with a pulmonary function measure and FeNO, while others, including 
Moraxella to FEV1/FVC and Stenotrophomonas to FeNO, were associated with a 
single trait.
CONCLUSIONS: Using state-of-the-art metagenomic sequencing, we identified 
specific microorganisms in indoor dust related to pulmonary function and airway 
inflammation. Some were previously associated with respiratory conditions; 
others were novel, suggesting specific environmental microbial components 
contribute to various respiratory outcomes. The methods used are applicable to 
studying microbiome in relation to other continuous outcomes. Video Abstract.

© 2024. This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the 
US; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01823-y
PMCID: PMC11256371
PMID: 39026261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. J Appl Microbiol. 2024 Jul 2;135(7):lxae178. doi: 10.1093/jambio/lxae178.

Exploring the effects of Saorilao-4 on the gut microbiota of pulmonary fibrosis 
model rats based on 16S rRNA sequencing.

Song X(1), Fu X(1), Niu S(1), Wang P(2), Qi J(3), Shi S(1), Chang H(1), Bai 
W(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Baotou Medical College, Baotou 014040, China.
(2)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Baotou 014030, 
China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Baotou Medical College, Baotou 014010, 
China.

AIMS: Pulmonary fibrosis (PF) is a progressive and incurable lung disease for 
which treatment options are limited. Here, we aimed to conduct an exploratory 
study on the effects of the Mongolian medicine Saorilao-4 (SRL) on the gut 
microbiota structure, species abundance, and diversity of a rat PF model as well 
as the mechanisms underlying such effects.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Rat fecal samples were analyzed using 16S rRNA sequencing 
technology. Bioinformatic and correlation analyses were performed on microbiota 
data to determine significant associations. SRL substantially attenuated the 
adverse effects exerted by PF on the structure and diversity of gut microbiota 
while regulating its alpha and beta diversities. Linear discriminant analysis 
effect size enabled the identification of 62 differentially abundant microbial 
taxa. Gut microbiota abundance analysis revealed that SRL significantly 
increased the relative abundance of bacterial phyla such as Firmicutes and 
Bacteroidetes. Moreover, SRL increased the proportion of beneficial bacteria, 
such as Lactobacillus and Bifidobacteriales, decreased the proportion of 
pathogenic bacteria, such as Rikenellaceae, and balanced the gut microbiota by 
regulating metabolic pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: SRL may attenuate PF by regulating gut microbiota. This exploratory 
study establishes the groundwork for investigating the metagenomics of PF.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Applied 
Microbiology International.

DOI: 10.1093/jambio/lxae178
PMID: 39020259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. ISME Commun. 2024 Jun 20;4(1):ycae088. doi: 10.1093/ismeco/ycae088.
eCollection  2024 Jan.

Multikingdom oral microbiome interactions in early-onset cryptogenic ischemic 
stroke.

Manzoor M(1), Leskelä J(1), Pietiäinen M(1)(2), Martinez-Majander N(3), 
Ylikotila P(4), Könönen E(5), Niiranen T(6)(7), Lahti L(8), Sinisalo J(9), 
Putaala J(3), Pussinen PJ(1)(10), Paju S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Diseases, University of Helsinki, 00014 
Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Industrial Biotechnology and Food Protein Production, VTT Technical Research 
Centre of Finland, 02044 Espoo, Finland.
(3)Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Hospital and University of 
Helsinki, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.
(4)Neurocenter, Turku University Hospital, University of Turku, 20521 Turku, 
Finland.
(5)Institute of Dentistry, University of Turku, 20500 Turku, Finland.
(6)Department of Public Health and Welfare, Finnish Institute for Health and 
Welfare, 00271 Helsinki, Finland.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Turku University Hospital and University of 
Turku, 20521 Turku, Finland.
(8)Department of Computing, University of Turku, 20500 Turku, Finland.
(9)Heart and Lung Center, Helsinki University Central Hospital, and Helsinki 
University, 00260 Helsinki, Finland.
(10)School of Medicine, Institute of Dentistry, University of Eastern Finland, 
70211 Kuopio, Finland.

Although knowledge of the role of the oral microbiome in ischemic stroke is 
steadily increasing, little is known about the multikingdom microbiota 
interactions and their consequences. We enrolled participants from a prospective 
multicentre case-control study and investigated multikingdom microbiome 
differences using saliva metagenomic datasets (n = 308) from young patients 
diagnosed with cryptogenic ischemic stroke (CIS) and age- and sex-matched 
stroke-free controls. Differentially abundant taxa were identified using 
Analysis of Compositions of Microbiomes with Bias Correction (ANCOM-BC2). 
Functional potential was inferred using HUMANn3. Our findings revealed 
significant differences in the composition and functional capacity of the oral 
microbiota associated with CIS. We identified 51 microbial species, including 47 
bacterial, 3 viral, and one fungal species associated with CIS in the adjusted 
model. Co-abundance network analysis highlighted a more intricate microbial 
network in CIS patients, indicating potential interactions and co-occurrence 
patterns among microbial species across kingdoms. The results of our metagenomic 
analysis reflect the complexity of the oral microbiome, with high diversity and 
multikingdom interactions, which may play a role in health and disease.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismeco/ycae088
PMCID: PMC11235082
PMID: 38988699

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. mSystems. 2024 Aug 20;9(8):e0072624. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00726-24. Epub 2024
 Jul 9.

In-hospital areas with distinct maintenance and staff/patient traffic have 
specific microbiome profiles, functions, and resistomes.

Duller S(1), Kumpitsch C(1)(2), Moissl-Eichinger C(1)(2), Wink L(1), Koskinen 
Mora K(1), Mahnert A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)D&R Institute of Hygiene, Microbiology and Environmental Medicine, Medical 
University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)BioTechMed Graz, Graz, Austria.

Hospitals are subject to strict microbial control. Stringent cleaning and 
confinement measures in hospitals lead to a decrease in microbial diversity, but 
an increase in resistance genes. Given the rise of antimicrobial resistances and 
healthcare-associated infections, understanding the hospital microbiome and its 
resistome is crucial. This study compared the microbiome and resistome at 
different levels of confinement (CL) within a single hospital. Using amplicon 
sequencing, shotgun metagenomics, and genome/plasmid reconstruction, we 
demonstrate that microbial composition differs in a stable way between the CLs 
and that the most restrictive confinement level CL1 had the lowest microbial but 
the highest functional diversity. This CL also exhibited a greater abundance of 
functions related to virulence, disease, defense, and stress response. 
Comparison of antibiotic resistance also showed differences among CLs in terms 
of the selection process and specific mechanisms for antimicrobial/antibiotic 
resistance. The resistances found in the samples of CL1 were mostly mediated via 
antibiotic efflux pumps and were mainly located on chromosomes, whereas in the 
other, less restrictive CL antibiotic resistances were more present on plasmids. 
This could be of particular importance for patient-related areas (CL2), as the 
potential spread of antibiotic resistances could be a major concern in this 
area. Our results show that there are differences in the microbiome and 
resistome even within a single hospital, reflecting room utilization and 
confinement. Since restrictive confinement selects for resistant microorganisms, 
strategies are required to deepen our understanding of dynamic processes of 
microbiome and resistome within hospital environments.
IMPORTANCE: Effective measures to combat antibiotic resistances and 
healthcare-associated infections are urgently needed, including optimization of 
microbial control. However, previous studies have indicated that stringent 
control can lead to an increase in the resistance capacities of microbiomes on 
surfaces. This study adds to previous knowledge by focusing on the conditions in 
a single hospital, resolving the microbiomes and their resistomes in three 
different confinement levels (CL): operating room, patient-related areas, and 
non-patient-related areas. We were able to identify stable key taxa; profiled 
the capacities of taxa, functions, and antimicrobial resistances (AMR); and 
reconstruct genomes and plasmids in each CL. Our results show that the most 
restrictive CL indeed had the highest functional diversity, but that resistances 
were mostly encoded on chromosomes, indicating a lower possibility of resistance 
spread. However, clever strategies are still required to strike a balance 
between microbial control and selective pressures in environments where patients 
need protection.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00726-24
PMCID: PMC11334533
PMID: 38980054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Environ Int. 2024 Aug;190:108869. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108869. Epub 2024
 Jul 2.

Beyond water and soil: Air emerges as a major reservoir of human pathogens.

Li T(1), Feng K(1), Wang S(1), Yang X(1), Peng X(1), Tu Q(2), Deng Y(3).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Environmental Biotechnology, Research Center for 
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China; 
College of Resources and Environment, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100049, China.
(2)Institute of Marine Science and Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao 
266237, China.
(3)CAS Key Laboratory of Environmental Biotechnology, Research Center for 
Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100085, China; 
College of Resources and Environment, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing 100049, China. Electronic address: yedeng@rcees.ac.cn.

Assessing the risk of human pathogens in the environment is crucial for 
controlling the spread of diseases and safeguarding human health. However, 
conducting a thorough assessment of low-abundance pathogens in highly complex 
environmental microbial communities remains challenging. This study compiled a 
comprehensive catalog of 247 human-pathogenic bacterial taxa from global 
biosafety agencies and identified more than 78 million genome-specific markers 
(GSMs) from their 17,470 sequenced genomes. Subsequently, we analyzed these 
pathogens' types, abundance, and diversity within 474 shotgun metagenomic 
sequences obtained from diverse environmental sources. The results revealed that 
among the four habitats studied (air, water, soil, and sediment), the detection 
rate, diversity, and abundance of detectable pathogens in the air all exceeded 
those in the other three habitats. Air, sediment, and water environments 
exhibited identical dominant taxa, indicating that these human pathogens may 
have unique environmental vectors for their transmission or survival. 
Furthermore, we observed the impact of human activities on the environmental 
risk posed by these pathogens, where greater amounts of human activities 
significantly increased the abundance of human pathogenic bacteria, especially 
in water and air. These findings have remarkable implications for the 
environmental risk assessment of human pathogens, providing valuable insights 
into their presence and distribution across different habitats.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envint.2024.108869
PMID: 38968831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 3;14(1):15292. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-64369-x.

Identification of commensal gut microbiota signatures as predictors of clinical 
severity and disease progression in multiple sclerosis.

Montgomery TL(1), Wang Q(2), Mirza A(3), Dwyer D(2), Wu Q(2), Dowling CA(2), 
Martens JWS(2), Yang J(2), Krementsov DN(4), Mao-Draayer Y(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, VT, 05401, USA.
(2)Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA.
(3)Pharmacoepidemiology in Multiple Sclerosis Research Group, The University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada.
(4)Department of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Vermont, 
Burlington, VT, 05401, USA. Dimitry.Krementsov@uvm.edu.
(5)Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann 
Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. yangmaodraayer@gmail.com.
(6)Autoimmunity Center of Excellence, Multiple Sclerosis Center of Excellence, 
Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. yangmaodraayer@gmail.com.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Jun 29:2023.06.26.23291875. doi: 10.1101/2023.06.26.23291875.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic autoimmune disease of the central nervous 
system and a leading cause of neurological disability in young adults. Clinical 
presentation and disease course are highly heterogeneous. Typically, disease 
progression occurs over time and is characterized by the gradual accumulation of 
disability. The risk of developing MS is driven by complex interactions between 
genetic and environmental factors, including the gut microbiome. How the 
commensal gut microbiota impacts disease severity and progression over time 
remains unknown. In a longitudinal study, disability status and associated 
clinical features in 58 MS patients were tracked over 4.2 ± 0.98 years, and the 
baseline fecal gut microbiome was characterized via 16S amplicon sequencing. 
Progressor status, defined as patients with an increase in Expanded Disability 
Status Scale (EDSS), were correlated with features of the gut microbiome to 
determine candidate microbiota associated with risk of MS disease progression. 
We found no overt differences in microbial community diversity and overall 
structure between MS patients exhibiting disease progression and 
non-progressors. However, a total of 41 bacterial species were associated with 
worsening disease, including a marked depletion in Akkermansia, Lachnospiraceae, 
and Oscillospiraceae, with an expansion of Alloprevotella, Prevotella-9, and 
Rhodospirillales. Analysis of the metabolic potential of the inferred metagenome 
from taxa associated with progression revealed enrichment in oxidative 
stress-inducing aerobic respiration at the expense of microbial vitamin K2 
production (linked to Akkermansia), and a depletion in SCFA metabolism (linked 
to Oscillospiraceae). Further, as a proof of principle, statistical modeling 
demonstrated that microbiota composition and clinical features were sufficient 
to predict disease progression. Additionally, we found that constipation, a 
frequent gastrointestinal comorbidity among MS patients, exhibited a divergent 
microbial signature compared with progressor status. These results demonstrate a 
proof of principle for the utility of the gut microbiome for predicting disease 
progression in MS in a small well-defined cohort. Further, analysis of the 
inferred metagenome suggested that oxidative stress, vitamin K2, and SCFAs are 
associated with progression, warranting future functional validation and 
mechanistic study.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-64369-x
PMCID: PMC11222390
PMID: 38961134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.L.M, QWang, A.M., D.D., QWu, C.A.D., J.WS.M, 
J.Y., and DK have nothing to disclose. Y Mao-Draayer has served as a consultant 
and/or received grant support from: Acorda, Bayer Pharmaceutical, Chugai, Biogen 
Idec, Celgene/Bristol Myers Squibb, EMD Serono, Sanofi-Genzyme, Genentech, 
Novartis, Horizon, Janssen, Questor, and Teva Neuroscience.

1. Acta Microbiol Immunol Hung. 2024 Jul 1;71(3):253-262. doi: 
10.1556/030.2024.02307. Print 2024 Sep 18.

16S rRNA based metagenomic analysis unveils unique oral microbial signatures in 
oral squamous cell carcinoma cases from Coastal Karnataka, India.

Aparna KG(1), Ravindra J(1), Chakraborty G(1), Ballamoole KK(2), Vinaya Kumar 
JR(3), Chakraborty A(1).

Author information:
(1)1Nitte (Deemed to be University), Department of Molecular Genetics and 
Cancer, Nitte University Centre for Science Education and Research (NUCSER), 
Deralakatte, Mangaluru-575018, India.
(2)2Nitte (Deemed to be University), Department of Infectious Diseases and 
Microbial Genomics, Nitte University Centre for Science Education and Research, 
Deralakatte, Mangaluru-575018, India.
(3)3Nitte (Deemed to be University), Department of Surgical Oncology, Justice 
K.S Hegde Charitable Hospital, Deralakatte, Mangaluru-575018, India.

Oral Squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is the 14th most frequent cancer with 
300,000 new cases and 100,000 deaths reported annually. Even with advanced 
therapy, the treatment outcomes are poor at advanced stages of the disease. The 
diagnosis of early OSCC is of paramount clinical value given the high mortality 
rate associated with the late stages of the disease. Recently, the role of 
microbiome in the disease manifestation, including oral cancer, has garnered 
considerable attention. But, to establish the role of bacteria in oral cancer, 
it is important to determine the differences in the colonization pattern in 
non-tumour and tumour tissues. In this study, 16S rRNA based metagenomic 
analyses of 13 tumorous and contralateral anatomically matched normal tissue 
biopsies, obtained from patients with advanced stage of OSCC were evaluated to 
understand the correlation between OSCC and oral microbiome. In this study we 
identified Fusobacterium, Prevotella, Capnocytophaga, Leptotrichia, 
Peptostreptococcus, Parvimonas and Bacteroidetes as the most significantly 
enriched taxa in OSCC lesions compared to the non-cancerous tissues. Further, 
PICRUSt2 analysis unveiled enhanced expression of metabolic pathways associated 
with L-lysine fermentation, pyruvate fermentation, and isoleucine biosynthesis 
in those microbes associated with OSCC tissues. These findings provide valuable 
insights into the distinctive microbial signatures associated with OSCC, 
offering potential biomarkers and metabolic pathways underlying OSCC 
pathogenesis. While our focus has primarily centred on microbial signatures, it 
is essential to recognize the pivotal role of host factors such as immune 
responses, genetic predisposition, and the oral microenvironment in shaping OSCC 
development and microbiome composition.

DOI: 10.1556/030.2024.02307
PMID: 38949882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. mSystems. 2024 Jul 23;9(7):e0092923. doi: 10.1128/msystems.00929-23. Epub 2024
 Jun 27.

An integrated metaproteomics workflow for studying host-microbe dynamics in 
bronchoalveolar lavage samples applied to cystic fibrosis disease.

Kruk ME(1), Mehta S(1), Murray K(1)(2), Higgins L(1)(2), Do K(1), Johnson JE(3), 
Wagner R(3), Wendt CH(4)(5), O'Connor JB(6), Harris JK(7), Laguna TA(6)(8), 
Jagtap PD(1), Griffin TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Center for Metabolomics and Proteomics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(3)Minnesota Supercomputing Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, USA.
(4)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Medical 
School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Minneapolis VA Health Care System, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, Seattle 
Children's Hospital, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Airway microbiota are known to contribute to lung diseases, such as cystic 
fibrosis (CF), but their contributions to pathogenesis are still unclear. To 
improve our understanding of host-microbe interactions, we have developed an 
integrated analytical and bioinformatic mass spectrometry (MS)-based 
metaproteomics workflow to analyze clinical bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples 
from people with airway disease. Proteins from BAL cellular pellets were 
processed and pooled together in groups categorized by disease status (CF vs. 
non-CF) and bacterial diversity, based on previously performed small subunit 
rRNA sequencing data. Proteins from each pooled sample group were digested and 
subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). MS/MS 
spectra were matched to human and bacterial peptide sequences leveraging a 
bioinformatic workflow using a metagenomics-guided protein sequence database and 
rigorous evaluation. Label-free quantification revealed differentially abundant 
human peptides from proteins with known roles in CF, like neutrophil elastase 
and collagenase, and proteins with lesser-known roles in CF, including 
apolipoproteins. Differentially abundant bacterial peptides were identified from 
known CF pathogens (e.g., Pseudomonas), as well as other taxa with potentially 
novel roles in CF. We used this host-microbe peptide panel for targeted 
parallel-reaction monitoring validation, demonstrating for the first time an 
MS-based assay effective for quantifying host-microbe protein dynamics within 
BAL cells from individual CF patients. Our integrated bioinformatic and 
analytical workflow combining discovery, verification, and validation should 
prove useful for diverse studies to characterize microbial contributors in 
airway diseases. Furthermore, we describe a promising preliminary panel of 
differentially abundant microbe and host peptide sequences for further study as 
potential markers of host-microbe relationships in CF disease 
pathogenesis.IMPORTANCEIdentifying microbial pathogenic contributors and 
dysregulated human responses in airway disease, such as CF, is critical to 
understanding disease progression and developing more effective treatments. To 
this end, characterizing the proteins expressed from bacterial microbes and 
human host cells during disease progression can provide valuable new insights. 
We describe here a new method to confidently detect and monitor abundance 
changes of both microbe and host proteins from challenging BAL samples commonly 
collected from CF patients. Our method uses both state-of-the art mass 
spectrometry-based instrumentation to detect proteins present in these samples 
and customized bioinformatic software tools to analyze the data and characterize 
detected proteins and their association with CF. We demonstrate the use of this 
method to characterize microbe and host proteins from individual BAL samples, 
paving the way for a new approach to understand molecular contributors to CF and 
other diseases of the airway.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.00929-23
PMCID: PMC11264604
PMID: 38934598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Jun 20;12(6):1250. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12061250.

Metagenomic Investigation of the Short-Term Temporal and Spatial Dynamics of the 
Bacterial Microbiome and the Resistome Downstream of a Wastewater Treatment 
Plant in the Iskar River in Bulgaria.

Donchev D(1), Ivanov IN(1), Stoikov I(1), Ivanova M(2).

Author information:
(1)National Reference Laboratory for Control and Monitoring of Antimicrobial 
Resistance, Department of Microbiology, National Center of Infectious and 
Parasitic Diseases, 26 Yanko Sakazov Blvd., 1504 Sofia, Bulgaria.
(2)Paralax Life Sciences, Sofia Center, 47 Bacho Kiro Str., 1202 Sofia, 
Bulgaria.

Waste Water Treatment Plants (WWTP) aim to reduce contamination in effluent 
water; however, studies indicate antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) persist 
post-treatment, potentially leading to their spread from human populated areas 
into the environment. This study evaluated the impact of a large WWTP serving 
125,000 people on the Iskar River in Bulgaria, by characterizing the spatial and 
short-term temporal dynamics in bacterial community dynamics and resistance 
profiles of the surface water. Pairs of samples were collected biweekly on four 
dates from two different locations, one about 800 m after the WWTP effluents and 
the other 10 km downstream. Taxonomic classification revealed the dominance of 
Pseudomonodota and Bacteriodota, notably the genera Flavobacterium, Aquirufa, 
Acidovorax, Polynucleobacter, and Limnohabitans. The taxonomic structure 
corresponded with both lentic and lotic freshwater habitats, with Flavobacterium 
exhibiting a significant decrease over the study period. Principal Coordinate 
Analysis revealed statistically significant differences in bacterial community 
composition between samples collected on different dates. Differential abundance 
analysis identified notable enrichment of Polynucleobacter and Limnohabitans. 
There were shifts within the enriched or depleted bacterial taxa between early 
and late sampling dates. High relative abundance of the genes erm(B), erm(F), 
mph(E), msr(E) (macrolides); tet(C), tet(O), tet(W), tet(Q) and tet(X) 
(tetracyclines); sul1 and sul2 (sulphonamides); and cfxA3, cfxA6 (beta-lactams) 
were detected, with trends of increased presence in the latest sampling dates 
and in the location closer to the WWTP. Of note, genes conferring resistance to 
carbapenems blaOXA-58 and blaIMP-33-like were identified. Co-occurrence analysis 
of ARGs and mobile genetic elements on putative plasmids showed few instances, 
and the estimated human health risk score (0.19) according to MetaCompare2.0 was 
low. In total, 29 metagenome-assembled genomes were recovered, with only a few 
harbouring ARGs. This study enhances our understanding of freshwater microbial 
community dynamics and antibiotic resistance profiles, highlighting the need for 
continued ARGs monitoring.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12061250
PMCID: PMC11207046
PMID: 38930632

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Imeta. 2024 Jan 31;3(2):e169. doi: 10.1002/imt2.169. eCollection 2024 Apr.

Infant age inversely correlates with gut carriage of resistance genes, 
reflecting modifications in microbial carbohydrate metabolism during early life.

Xu X(1)(2)(3), Feng Q(1)(2)(4), Zhang T(1)(2), Gao Y(1)(2), Cheng Q(5), Zhang 
W(1)(2), Wu Q(6), Xu K(7), Li Y(8), Nguyen N(9), Taft DH(9), Mills DA(9)(10), 
Lemay DG(11), Zhu W(1)(2), Mao S(1)(2), Zhang A(12), Xu K(13), Liu J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Microbiology, College of Animal Science & 
Technology Nanjing Agricultural University Nanjing China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Nutrition and Animal Health, 
National Center for International Research on Animal Gut Nutrition Nanjing 
Agricultural University Nanjing China.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Institute 
of Nutrition Fudan University Shanghai China.
(4)Biological Engineering Division Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) 
Cambridge Massachusetts USA.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Tongji 
Medical College Huazhong University of Science and Technology Wuhan China.
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology Baylor College of Medicine Houston 
Texas USA.
(7)Department of Statistics University of Chicago Chicago Illinois.
(8)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Human Phenome Institute Fudan 
University Shanghai China.
(9)Department of Food Science and Technology University of California, Davis 
Davis California USA.
(10)Department of Viticulture and Enology, Robert Mondavi Institute for Wine and 
Food Science University of California, Davis Davis California USA.
(11)USDA ARS Western Human Nutrition Research Center Davis California USA.
(12)Animal Disease Prevention and Food Safety Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, Key Laboratory of Bio-Resource and Eco-Environment of Ministry of 
Education, College of Life Sciences Sichuan University Chengdu China.
(13)Department of Biostatistics, Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety, NHC Key 
Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment, School of Public Health Fudan 
University Shanghai China.

The infant gut microbiome is increasingly recognized as a reservoir of 
antibiotic resistance genes, yet the assembly of gut resistome in infants and 
its influencing factors remain largely unknown. We characterized resistome in 
4132 metagenomes from 963 infants in six countries and 4285 resistance genes 
were observed. The inherent resistome pattern of healthy infants (N = 272) could 
be distinguished by two stages: a multicompound resistance phase (Months 0-7) 
and a tetracycline-mupirocin-β-lactam-dominant phase (Months 8-14). Microbial 
taxonomy explained 40.7% of the gut resistome of healthy infants, with 
Escherichia (25.5%) harboring the most resistance genes. In a further analysis 
with all available infants (N = 963), we found age was the strongest influencer 
on the resistome and was negatively correlated with the overall resistance 
during the first 3 years (p < 0.001). Using a random-forest approach, a set of 
34 resistance genes could be used to predict age (R 2 = 68.0%). Leveraging 
microbial host inference analyses, we inferred the age-dependent assembly of 
infant resistome was a result of shifts in the gut microbiome, primarily driven 
by changes in taxa that disproportionately harbor resistance genes across taxa 
(e.g., Escherichia coli more frequently harbored resistance genes than other 
taxa). We performed metagenomic functional profiling and metagenomic assembled 
genome analyses whose results indicate that the development of gut resistome was 
driven by changes in microbial carbohydrate metabolism, with an increasing need 
for carbohydrate-active enzymes from Bacteroidota and a decreasing need for 
Pseudomonadota during infancy. Importantly, we observed increased acquired 
resistance genes over time, which was related to increased horizontal gene 
transfer in the developing infant gut microbiome. In summary, infant age was 
negatively correlated with antimicrobial resistance gene levels, reflecting a 
composition shift in the gut microbiome, likely driven by the changing need for 
microbial carbohydrate metabolism during early life.

© 2024 The Authors. iMeta published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on 
behalf of iMeta Science.

DOI: 10.1002/imt2.169
PMCID: PMC11170968
PMID: 38882494

Conflict of interest statement: David A. Mills is a cofounder of Evolve 
Biosystems and BCD Biosciences. Evolve Biosystems and BCD Biosciences had no 
role in this manuscript's conceptualization, design, data collection, analysis, 
or preparation. The remaining authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Jun 6;12(1):104. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01806-z.

Compendium of 5810 genomes of sheep and goat gut microbiomes provides new 
insights into the glycan and mucin utilization.

Zhang K(#)(1), He C(#)(2), Wang L(#)(3), Suo L(#)(4)(5), Guo M(#)(6), Guo J(7), 
Zhang T(1), Xu Y(1), Lei Y(1), Liu G(1), Qian Q(1), Mao Y(1), Kalds P(1), Wu 
Y(4)(5), Cuoji A(4)(5), Yang Y(1), Brugger D(8), Gan S(9), Wang M(2), Wang 
X(10)(11)(12), Zhao F(13), Chen Y(14)(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, China.
(2)College of Information Engineering, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, China.
(3)Plateau Livestock Genetic Resources Protection and Innovative Utilization Key 
Laboratory of Qinghai Province, Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding 
On Tibetan Plateau, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Qinghai Academy 
of Animal and Veterinary Medicine, Qinghai University, Xining, 810016, China.
(4)Institute of Animal Sciences, Tibet Academy of Agricultural and Animal 
Husbandry Sciences, Lhasa, 850009, China.
(5)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding On Tibetan Plateau, Ministry 
of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Lhasa, 850009, China.
(6)College of Animal Engineering, Yangling Vocational and Technical College, 
Yangling, 712100, China.
(7)College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, 
Chengdu, 611100, China.
(8)Institute of Animal Nutrition and Dietetics, Vetsuisse-Faculty, University of 
Zurich, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland.
(9)College of Coastal Agricultural Sciences, Guangdong Ocean University, 
Zhanjiang, 524088, China.
(10)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, China. 
xiaolongwang@nwafu.edu.cn.
(11)Key Laboratory of Livestock Biology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, China. xiaolongwang@nwafu.edu.cn.
(12)School of Future Technology On Bio-Breeding, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, 712100, China. xiaolongwang@nwafu.edu.cn.
(13)Computational Genomics Lab, Beijing Institutes of Life Science, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 102206, China. zhfq@biols.ac.cn.
(14)International Joint Agriculture Research Center for Animal Bio-Breeding, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, 
Breeding and Reproduction of Shaanxi Province, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 712100, China. 
chenyulin@nwafu.edu.cn.
(15)Key Laboratory of Livestock Biology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, 
712100, China. chenyulin@nwafu.edu.cn.
(16)School of Future Technology On Bio-Breeding, Northwest A&F University, 
Yangling, 712100, China. chenyulin@nwafu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Ruminant gut microbiota are critical in ecological adaptation, 
evolution, and nutrition utilization because it regulates energy metabolism, 
promotes nutrient absorption, and improves immune function. To study the 
functional roles of key gut microbiota in sheep and goats, it is essential to 
construct reference microbial gene catalogs and high-quality microbial genomes 
database.
RESULTS: A total of 320 fecal samples were collected from 21 different sheep and 
goat breeds, originating from 32 distinct farms. Metagenomic deep sequencing and 
binning assembly were utilized to construct a comprehensive microbial genome 
information database for the gut microbiota. We successfully generated the 
largest reference gene catalogs for gut microbiota in sheep and goats, 
containing over 162 million and 82 million nonredundant predicted genes, 
respectively, with 49 million shared nonredundant predicted genes and 1138 
shared species. We found that the rearing environment has a greater impact on 
microbial composition and function than the host's species effect. Through 
subsequent assembly, we obtained 5810 medium- and high-quality 
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs), out of which 2661 were yet unidentified 
species. Among these MAGs, we identified 91 bacterial taxa that specifically 
colonize the sheep gut, which encode polysaccharide utilization loci for glycan 
and mucin degradation.
CONCLUSIONS: By shedding light on the co-symbiotic microbial communities in the 
gut of small ruminants, our study significantly enhances the understanding of 
their nutrient degradation and disease susceptibility. Our findings emphasize 
the vast potential of untapped resources in functional bacterial species within 
ruminants, further expanding our knowledge of how the ruminant gut microbiota 
recognizes and processes glycan and mucins. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01806-z
PMCID: PMC11155115
PMID: 38845047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Genome Med. 2024 Jun 5;16(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s13073-024-01344-1.

Colorectal cancer microbiome programs DNA methylation of host cells by affecting 
methyl donor metabolism.

Liu Z(1), Zhang Q(1), Zhang H(1), Yi Z(1), Ma H(1), Wang X(2), Wang J(3), Liu 
Y(1), Zheng Y(4), Fang W(4), Huang P(5), Liu X(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathogen Biology-Microbiology Division, State Key Laboratory of 
Reproductive Medicine, Key Laboratory of Pathogen of Jiangsu Province, Key 
Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Center of Global 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, China.
(2)Core Facility Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, No. 300 Guangzhou Road, Nanjing, 210029, China.
(3)The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou 
Municipal Hospital, Gusu School, Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, 215008, 
China.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, 310003, China.
(5)Department of Surgery, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 211166, China. huangping@njmu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Pathogen Biology-Microbiology Division, State Key Laboratory of 
Reproductive Medicine, Key Laboratory of Pathogen of Jiangsu Province, Key 
Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Center of Global 
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 211166, China. 
xingyinliu@njmu.edu.cn.
(7)The Affiliated Suzhou Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou 
Municipal Hospital, Gusu School, Nanjing Medical University, Suzhou, 215008, 
China. xingyinliu@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) arises from complex interactions between 
host and environment, which include the gut and tissue microbiome. It is 
hypothesized that epigenetic regulation by gut microbiota is a fundamental 
interface by which commensal microbes dynamically influence intestinal biology. 
The aim of this study is to explore the interplay between gut and tissue 
microbiota and host DNA methylation in CRC.
METHODS: Metagenomic sequencing of fecal samples was performed on matched CRC 
patients (n = 18) and healthy controls (n = 18). Additionally, tissue microbiome 
was profiled with 16S rRNA gene sequencing on tumor (n = 24) and tumor-adjacent 
normal (n = 24) tissues of CRC patients, while host DNA methylation was assessed 
through whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) in a subset of 13 individuals.
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed substantial alterations in the DNA methylome of 
CRC tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues. An extensive meta-analysis, 
incorporating publicly available and in-house data, identified significant 
shifts in microbial-derived methyl donor-related pathways between tumor and 
adjacent normal tissues. Of note, we observed a pronounced enrichment of 
microbial-associated CpGs within the promoter regions of genes in adjacent 
normal tissues, a phenomenon notably absent in tumor tissues. Furthermore, we 
established consistent and recurring associations between methylation patterns 
of tumor-related genes and specific bacterial taxa.
CONCLUSIONS: This study emphasizes the pivotal role of the gut microbiota and 
pathogenic bacteria in dynamically shaping DNA methylation patterns, impacting 
physiological homeostasis, and contributing to CRC tumorigenesis. These findings 
provide valuable insights into the intricate host-environment interactions in 
CRC development and offer potential avenues for therapeutic interventions in 
this disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-024-01344-1
PMCID: PMC11151592
PMID: 38840170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. mBio. 2024 Jul 17;15(7):e0073524. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00735-24. Epub 2024 May
31.

Guild-level signature of gut microbiome for diabetic kidney disease.

Tang S(#)(1), Wu G(#)(2)(3), Liu Y(#)(1), Xue B(1), Zhang S(1), Zhang W(1), Jia 
Y(1), Xie Q(1), Liang C(1), Wang L(1), Heng H(1), Wei W(1), Shi X(1), Hu Y(1), 
Yang J(1), Zhao L(1), Wang X(1), Zhao L(2)(3)(4), Yuan H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Zhengzhou University People's Hospital, Henan 
Provincial People's Hospital, Henan Provincial Key Medicine Laboratory of 
Intestinal Microecology and Diabetes, Zhengzhou, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology and New Jersey Institute for 
Food, Nutrition, and Health, School of Environmental and Biological Sciences 
Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
(3)Rutgers-Jiaotong Joint Laboratory for Microbiome and Human Health, New 
Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism and Ministry of Education Key 
Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Current microbiome signatures for chronic diseases such as diabetic kidney 
disease (DKD) are mainly based on low-resolution taxa such as genus or phyla and 
are often inconsistent among studies. In microbial ecosystems, bacterial 
functions are strain specific, and taxonomically different bacteria tend to form 
co-abundance functional groups called guilds. Here, we identified guild-level 
signatures for DKD by performing in-depth metagenomic sequencing and conducting 
genome-centric and guild-based analysis on fecal samples from 116 DKD patients 
and 91 healthy subjects. Redundancy analysis on 1,543 high-quality 
metagenome-assembled genomes (HQMAGs) identified 54 HQMAGs that were 
differentially distributed among the young healthy control group, elderly 
healthy control group, early-stage DKD patients (EDG), and late-stage DKD 
patients (LDG). Co-abundance network analysis classified the 54 HQMAGs into two 
guilds. Compared to guild 2, guild 1 contained more short-chain fatty acid 
biosynthesis genes and fewer genes encoding uremic toxin indole biosynthesis, 
antibiotic resistance, and virulence factors. Guild indices, derived from the 
total abundance of guild members and their diversity, delineated DKD patients 
from healthy subjects and between different severities of DKD. Age-adjusted 
partial Spearman correlation analysis showed that the guild indices were 
correlated with DKD disease progression and with risk indicators of poor 
prognosis. We further validated that the random forest classification model 
established with the 54 HQMAGs was also applicable for classifying patients with 
end-stage renal disease and healthy subjects in an independent data set. 
Therefore, this genome-level, guild-based microbial analysis strategy may 
identify DKD patients with different severity at an earlier stage to guide 
clinical interventions.
IMPORTANCE: Traditionally, microbiome research has been constrained by the 
reliance on taxonomic classifications that may not reflect the functional 
dynamics or the ecological interactions within microbial communities. By 
transcending these limitations with a genome-centric and guild-based analysis, 
our study sheds light on the intricate and specific interactions between 
microbial strains and diabetic kidney disease (DKD). We have unveiled two 
distinct microbial guilds with opposite influences on host health, which may 
redefine our understanding of microbial contributions to disease progression. 
The implications of our findings extend beyond mere association, providing 
potential pathways for intervention and opening new avenues for patient 
stratification in clinical settings. This work paves the way for a paradigm 
shift in microbiome research in DKD and potentially other chronic kidney 
diseases, from a focus on taxonomy to a more nuanced view of microbial ecology 
and function that is more closely aligned with clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00735-24
PMCID: PMC11253615
PMID: 38819146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.Z. is a co-founder of Notitia Biotechnologies 
Company.

1. mLife. 2023 Sep 13;2(3):267-271. doi: 10.1002/mlf2.12079. eCollection 2023
Sep.

A small, polyphyletic group of Firmicutes synthesizes trimethylamine 
from l-carnitine.

Vital M(1), Heinrich-Sanchez Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Hannover Medical School Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hospital 
Epidemiology Hannover Germany.

Gut microbiota-derived trimethylamine (TMA) is associated with cardiometabolic 
disorders and exemplifies a microbial involvement in the etiology of emerging, 
noncommunicable diseases, the leading causes of death worldwide. Three 
biochemical pathways taking dietary compounds as intake have been described with 
distinct taxa involved that are all present at low relative abundances. A 
recently discovered pathway is now considered to be the main route for TMA 
synthesis from l-carnitine involving γ-butyrobetaine as an intermediate product. 
By comprehensive (meta) genomic screening of publicly available data, namely, 
genomes of the UHGG catalog (n > 200,000) and 10 metagenomic (transcriptomic) 
data sets, we revealed bacteria synthesizing TMA via this pathway and specified 
their ecophysiology. Results will contribute to stratification of individuals 
based on their gut microbiota's potential to synthesize TMA and might aid in the 
development of strategies restricting TMA formation.

© 2023 The Authors. mLife published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd. on 
behalf of Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

DOI: 10.1002/mlf2.12079
PMCID: PMC10989800
PMID: 38817809

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 May 10;15:1337917. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1337917. 
eCollection 2024.

Evaluation of fecal sample collection methods for feline gut microbiome 
profiling: fecal loop vs. litter box.

Ma X(1)(2), Brinker E(3), Lea CR(4), Delmain D(4), Chamorro ED(4), Martin 
DR(5)(6), Graff EC(2)(5), Wang X(#)(2)(5)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn 
University, Auburn, AL, United States.
(3)Department of Comparative Pathobiology, Cummings School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Tufts University, North Grafton, MA, United States.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn 
University, Auburn, AL, United States.
(5)Scott-Ritchey Research Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn 
University, Auburn, AL, United States.
(6)Department of Anatomy, Physiology, and Pharmacology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, United States.
(7)Center for Advanced Science, Innovation, and Commerce, Alabama Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Auburn, AL, United States.
(8)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Microbial population structures within fecal samples are vital for 
disease screening, diagnosis, and gut microbiome research. The two primary 
methods for collecting feline fecal samples are: (1) using a fecal loop, which 
retrieves a rectal sample using a small, looped instrument, and (2) using the 
litter box, which collects stool directly from the litter. Each method has its 
own advantages and disadvantages and is suitable for different research 
objectives.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Whole-genome shotgun metagenomic sequencing were performed 
on the gut microbiomes of fecal samples collected using these two methods from 
10 adult cats housed in the same research facility. We evaluated the influence 
of collection methods on feline microbiome analysis, particularly their impact 
on DNA extraction, metagenomic sequencing yield, microbial composition, and 
diversity in subsequent gut microbiome analyses. Interestingly, fecal sample 
collection using a fecal loop resulted in a lower yield of microbial DNA 
compared to the litterbox method (p = 0.004). However, there were no significant 
differences between the two groups in the proportion of host contamination 
(p = 0.106), virus contamination (p = 0.232), relative taxonomy abundance of top 
five phyla (Padj > 0.638), or the number of microbial genes covered (p = 0.770). 
Furthermore, no significant differences were observed in alpha-diversity, 
beta-diversity, the number of taxa identified at each taxonomic level, and the 
relative abundance of taxonomic units.
DISCUSSION: These two sample collection methods do not affect microbial 
population structures within fecal samples and collecting fecal samples directly 
from the litterbox within 6 hours after defecation can be considered a reliable 
approach for microbiome research.

Copyright © 2024 Ma, Brinker, Lea, Delmain, Chamorro, Martin, Graff and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1337917
PMCID: PMC11127567
PMID: 38800749

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

1. Periodontol 2000. 2024 Jun;95(1):176-193. doi: 10.1111/prd.12571. Epub 2024
May  26.

Microbial diagnostics in periodontal diseases.

Manoil D(1)(2), Parga A(1)(3), Bostanci N(2), Belibasakis GN(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cariology and Endodontics, University Clinics of Dental Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(2)Division of Oral Health and Periodontology, Department of Dental Medicine, 
Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, CIBUS-Faculty of Biology, 
Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Microbial analytical methods have been instrumental in elucidating the complex 
microbial etiology of periodontal diseases, by shaping our understanding of 
subgingival community dynamics. Certain pathobionts can orchestrate the 
establishment of dysbiotic communities that can subvert the host immune system, 
triggering inflammation and tissue destruction. Yet, diagnosis and management of 
periodontal conditions still rely on clinical and radiographic examinations, 
overlooking the well-established microbial etiology. This review summarizes the 
chronological emergence of periodontal etiological models and the co-evolution 
with technological advances in microbial detection. We additionally review the 
microbial analytical approaches currently accessible to clinicians, highlighting 
their value in broadening the periodontal assessment. The epidemiological 
importance of obtaining culture-based antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of 
periodontal taxa for antibiotic resistance surveillance is also underscored, 
together with clinically relevant analytical approaches to guide antibiotherapy 
choices, when necessary. Furthermore, the importance of 16S-based community and 
shotgun metagenomic profiling is discussed in outlining dysbiotic microbial 
signatures. Because dysbiosis precedes periodontal damage, biomarker 
identification offers early diagnostic possibilities to forestall disease 
relapses during maintenance. Altogether, this review highlights the 
underutilized potential of clinical microbiology in periodontology, spotlighting 
the clinical areas most conductive to its diagnostic implementation for 
enhancing prevention, treatment predictability, and addressing global antibiotic 
resistance.

© 2024 The Authors. Periodontology 2000 published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/prd.12571
PMID: 38797888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Microorganisms. 2024 May 16;12(5):1005. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12051005.

Pre-Bleaching Coral Microbiome Is Enriched in Beneficial Taxa and Functions.

Lima LFO(1)(2), Alker AT(3), Morris MM(4), Edwards RA(5), de Putron SJ(6), 
Dinsdale EA(5).

Author information:
(1)Marine Biology, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(2)San Diego State University, San Diego, CA 92182, USA.
(3)Innovative Genomics Institute, University of California, Berkeley, SA 5045, 
USA.
(4)Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA 94550, USA.
(5)Flinders Accelerator Microbiome Exploration, Flinders University, Bedford 
Park, SA 5042, Australia.
(6)Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences, St. George's GE01, Bermuda.

Coral reef health is tightly connected to the coral holobiont, which is the 
association between the coral animal and a diverse microbiome functioning as a 
unit. The coral holobiont depends on key services such as nitrogen and sulfur 
cycling mediated by the associated bacteria. However, these microbial services 
may be impaired in response to environmental changes, such as thermal stress. A 
perturbed microbiome may lead to coral bleaching and disease outbreaks, which 
have caused an unprecedented loss in coral cover worldwide, particularly 
correlated to a warming ocean. The response mechanisms of the coral holobiont 
under high temperatures are not completely understood, but the associated 
microbial community is a potential source of acquired heat-tolerance. Here we 
investigate the effects of increased temperature on the taxonomic and functional 
profiles of coral surface mucous layer (SML) microbiomes in relationship to 
coral-algal physiology. We used shotgun metagenomics in an experimental setting 
to understand the dynamics of microbial taxa and genes in the SML microbiome of 
the coral Pseudodiploria strigosa under heat treatment. The metagenomes of 
corals exposed to heat showed high similarity at the level of bacterial genera 
and functional genes related to nitrogen and sulfur metabolism and stress 
response. The coral SML microbiome responded to heat with an increase in the 
relative abundance of taxa with probiotic potential, and functional genes for 
nitrogen and sulfur acquisition. Coral-algal physiology significantly explained 
the variation in the microbiome at taxonomic and functional levels. These 
consistent and specific microbial taxa and gene functions that significantly 
increased in proportional abundance in corals exposed to heat are potentially 
beneficial to coral health and thermal resistance.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12051005
PMCID: PMC11123844
PMID: 38792833

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Biomedicines. 2024 May 1;12(5):996. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12050996.

Microbial Signatures in COVID-19: Distinguishing Mild and Severe Disease via Gut 
Microbiota.

Galeeva JS(1), Fedorov DE(1), Starikova EV(1), Manolov AI(1), Pavlenko AV(1), 
Selezneva OV(2), Klimina KM(2), Veselovsky VA(2), Morozov MD(2), Yanushevich 
OO(3), Krikheli NI(3), Levchenko OV(3), Andreev DN(3), Sokolov FS(3), Fomenko 
AK(3), Devkota MK(3), Andreev NG(3), Zaborovskiy AV(3), Bely PA(3), 
Tsaregorodtsev SV(3), Evdokimov VV(3), Maev IV(3), Govorun VM(3), Ilina EN(3).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Department of 
Mathematical Biology and Bioinformatics, Moscow 117246, Russia.
(2)Lopukhin Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine 
of Federal Medical Biological Agency, Moscow 119435, Russia.
(3)Department of Clinical Dentistry, Moscow State University of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Moscow 127473, Russia.

The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, has significantly 
impacted global healthcare, underscoring the importance of exploring the virus's 
effects on infected individuals beyond treatments and vaccines. Notably, recent 
findings suggest that SARS-CoV-2 can infect the gut, thereby altering the gut 
microbiota. This study aimed to analyze the gut microbiota composition 
differences between COVID-19 patients experiencing mild and severe symptoms. We 
conducted 16S rRNA metagenomic sequencing on fecal samples from 49 mild and 43 
severe COVID-19 cases upon hospital admission. Our analysis identified a 
differential abundance of specific bacterial species associated with the 
severity of the disease. Severely affected patients showed an association with 
Enterococcus faecium, Akkermansia muciniphila, and others, while milder cases 
were linked to Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Alistipes putredinis, Blautia 
faecis, and additional species. Furthermore, a network analysis using SPIEC-EASI 
indicated keystone taxa and highlighted structural differences in bacterial 
connectivity, with a notable disruption in the severe group. Our study 
highlights the diverse impacts of SARS-CoV-2 on the gut microbiome among both 
mild and severe COVID-19 patients, showcasing a spectrum of microbial responses 
to the virus. Importantly, these findings align, to some extent, with 
observations from other studies on COVID-19 gut microbiomes, despite variations 
in methodologies. The findings from this study, based on retrospective data, 
establish a foundation for future prospective research to confirm the role of 
the gut microbiome as a predictive biomarker for the severity of COVID-19.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12050996
PMCID: PMC11118803
PMID: 38790958

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 May 3;15:1387957. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1387957. 
eCollection 2024.

Hybridization alters red deer gut microbiome and metabolites.

Wei L(1)(2), Zeng B(3), Li B(4), Guo W(5), Mu Z(1), Gan Y(5), Li Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of High Active Traditional Chinese Drug Delivery 
System, Chongqing Medical and Pharmaceutical College, Chongqing, China.
(2)College of Pharmacy, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(3)Farm Animal Genetic Resources Exploration and Innovation Key Laboratory of 
Sichuan Province, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu, China.
(4)College of Resources and Environment, Aba Teachers University, Aba, China.
(5)School of Laboratory Medicine, Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, China.
(6)Key Laboratory of Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Ministry of Education & Key 
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology of Guizhou Province, & Collaborative 
Innovation Center for Prevention and Control of Endemic and Ethnic Regional 
Diseases Co-constructed by the Province and Ministry, Guizhou Medical 
University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China.

The host genes play a crucial role in shaping the composition and structure of 
the gut microbiome. Red deer is listed as an endangered species by the 
International Union for the Conservation of Nature, and its pilose antlers have 
good medicinal value. Hybridization can lead to heterosis, resulting in 
increased pilose antler production and growth performance in hybrid deer. 
However, the role of the gut microbiome in hybrid deer remains largely unknown. 
In this study, alpha and beta diversity analysis showed that hybridization 
altered the composition and structure of the gut microbiome of the offspring, 
with the composition and structure of the hybrid offspring being more similar to 
those of the paternal parents. Interestingly, the LefSe differential analysis 
showed that there were some significantly enriched gut microbiome in the 
paternal parents (such as g_Prevotellaceae UCG-003, f_Bacteroidales RF16 group; 
Ambiguous_taxa, etc.) and the maternal parents (including g_Alistipes, 
g_Anaerosporobacter, etc.), which remained significantly enriched in the hybrid 
offspring. Additionally, the hybrid offspring exhibited a significant advantage 
over the parental strains, particularly in taxa that can produce short-chain 
fatty acids, such as g_Prevotellaceae UCG-003, g_Roseburia, g_Succinivibrio, and 
g_Lachnospiraceae UCG-006. Similar to bacterial transmission, metagenomic 
analysis showed that some signaling pathways related to pilose antler growth 
("Wnt signaling pathway," "PI3K Akt signaling pathway," "MAPK signaling 
pathway") were also enriched in hybrid red deer after hybridization. 
Furthermore, metabolomic analysis revealed that compared with the paternal and 
maternal parents, the hybrid offspring exhibited significant enrichment in 
metabolites related to "Steroid hormone biosynthesis," "Tryptophan metabolism," 
"Valine, leucine and isoleucine metabolism," and "Vitamin B metabolism." 
Notably, the metagenomic analysis also showed that these metabolic pathways were 
significantly enriched in hybrid deer. Finally, a correlation analysis between 
the gut microbiome and metabolites revealed a significant positive correlation 
between the enriched taxa in hybrid deer, including the Bacteroidales RF16 
group, Prevotellaceae, and Succinivibrio, and metabolites, such as 
7α-hydroxytestosterone, L-kynurenine, indole, L-isoleucine, and riboflavin. The 
study contributes valuable data toward understanding the role of the gut 
microbiome from red deer in hybridization and provides reference data for 
further screening potential probiotics and performing microbial-assisted 
breeding that promotes the growth of red deer pilose antlers and bodies, 
development, and immunity.

Copyright © 2024 Wei, Zeng, Li, Guo, Mu, Gan and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1387957
PMCID: PMC11112572
PMID: 38784815

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. mSystems. 2024 Jun 18;9(6):e0133923. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01339-23. Epub 2024
 May 16.

Gardnerella diversity and ecology in pregnancy and preterm birth.

Berman HL(1), Goltsman DSA(2)(3), Anderson M(1), Relman DA(2)(3)(4), Callahan 
BJ(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Population Health and Pathobiology, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(4)Infectious Diseases Section, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, 
Palo Alto, California, USA.
(5)Bioinformatics Research Center, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
North Carolina, USA.

The vaginal microbiome has been linked to negative health outcomes including 
preterm birth. Specific taxa, including Gardnerella spp., have been identified 
as risk factors for these conditions. Historically, microbiome analysis methods 
have treated all Gardnerella spp. as one species, but the broad diversity of 
Gardnerella has become more apparent. We explore the diversity of Gardnerella 
clades and genomic species in the vaginal microbiome of pregnant women and their 
associations with microbiome composition and preterm birth. Relative abundance 
of Gardnerella clades and genomic species and other taxa was quantified in 
shotgun metagenomic sequencing data from three distinct cohorts of pregnant 
women. We also assessed the diversity and abundance of Gardnerella variants in 
16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing data from seven previously conducted studies 
in differing populations. Individual microbiomes often contained multiple 
Gardnerella variants, and the number of clades was associated with increased 
microbial load, or the ratio of non-human reads to human reads. Taxon 
co-occurrence patterns were largely consistent across Gardnerella clades and 
among cohorts. Some variants previously described as rare were prevalent in 
other cohorts, highlighting the importance of surveying a diverse set of 
populations to fully capture the diversity of Gardnerella. The diversity of 
Gardnerella both across populations and within individual vaginal microbiomes 
has long been unappreciated, as has been the intra-species diversity of many 
other members of the vaginal microbiome. The broad genomic diversity of 
Gardnerella has led to its reclassification as multiple species; here we 
demonstrate the diversity of Gardnerella found within and between vaginal 
microbiomes.IMPORTANCEThe present study shows that single microbiomes can 
contain all currently known species of Gardnerella and that multiple similar 
species can exist within the same environment. Furthermore, surveys of 
demographically distinct populations suggest that some species appear more 
commonly in certain populations. Further studies in broad and diverse 
populations will be necessary to fully understand the ecological roles of each 
Gardnerella sp., how they can co-exist, and their distinct impacts on microbial 
communities, preterm birth, and other health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01339-23
PMCID: PMC11338264
PMID: 38752784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2024 Mar-Apr;18(3-4):111-125. doi: 
10.1080/17476348.2024.2355155. Epub 2024 Jun 12.

Targeting respiratory microbiomes in COPD and bronchiectasis.

Mac Aogáin M(1)(2), Tiew PY(3)(4)(5), Jaggi TK(3), Narayana JK(3), Singh S(6), 
Hansbro PM(7), Segal LN(6), Chotirmall SH(3)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)School of Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(3)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore.
(4)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Singapore General 
Hospital, Singapore, Singapore.
(5)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.
(6)Division of Pulmonary Critical Care & Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Centre for Inflammation, Centenary Institute and University of Technology 
Sydney, Faculty of Science, School of Life Sciences, Sydney, Australia.
(8)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 
Singapore.

INTRODUCTION: This review summarizes our current understanding of the 
respiratory microbiome in COPD and Bronchiectasis. We explore the interplay 
between microbial communities, host immune responses, disease pathology, and 
treatment outcomes.
AREAS COVERED: We detail the dynamics of the airway microbiome, its influence on 
chronic respiratory diseases, and analytical challenges. Relevant articles from 
PubMed and Medline (January 2010-March 2024) were retrieved and summarized. We 
examine clinical correlations of the microbiome in COPD and bronchiectasis, 
assessing how current therapies impact upon it. The potential of emerging 
immunotherapies, antiinflammatories and antimicrobial strategies is discussed, 
with focus on the pivotal role of commensal taxa in maintaining respiratory 
health and the promising avenue of microbiome remodeling for disease management.
EXPERT OPINION: Given the heterogeneity in microbiome composition and its 
pivotal role in disease development and progression, a shift toward 
microbiome-directed therapeutics is appealing. This transition, from traditional 
'pathogencentric' diagnostic and treatment modalities to those acknowledging the 
microbiome, can be enabled by evolving crossdisciplinary platforms which have 
the potential to accelerate microbiome-based interventions into routine clinical 
practice. Bridging the gap between comprehensive microbiome analysis and 
clinical application, however, remains challenging, necessitating continued 
innovation in research, diagnostics, trials, and therapeutic development 
pipelines.

DOI: 10.1080/17476348.2024.2355155
PMID: 38743428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Apr 27:2024.04.26.24306431. doi: 
10.1101/2024.04.26.24306431.

Bad company? The pericardium microbiome in people investigated for tuberculosis 
pericarditis in an HIV-prevalent setting.

Nyawo G, Naidoo C, Wu BG, Kwok B, Clemente JC, Li Y, Minnies S, Reeve B, Moodley 
S, John TJ, Karamchand S, Singh S, Pecararo A, Doubell A, Kyriakakis C, Warren 
R, Segal LN, Theron G.

Update in
    Microbes Infect. 2024 Nov 9:105434. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105434.

BACKGROUND: The microbiome likely plays a role in tuberculosis (TB) 
pathogenesis. We evaluated the site-of-disease microbiome and predicted 
metagenome in people with presumptive tuberculous pericarditis, a major cause of 
mortality, and explored for the first time, the interaction between its 
association with C-reactive protein (CRP), a potential diagnostic biomarker and 
the site-of-disease microbiome in extrapulmonary TB.
METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) 
provided background sampling controls and pericardial fluid (PF) for 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing analysed using QIIME2 and PICRUSt2. Blood was collected to 
measure CRP.
RESULTS: PF from people with definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and 
non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous pericarditis differed in β-diversity. dTBs were, 
vs. nTBs, Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria- enriched. Within dTBs, 
HIV-positives were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium- , Methylobacterium- , and 
Leptothrix -enriched vs. HIV-negatives and HIV-positive dTBs on ART were 
Mycobacterium - and Bifidobacterium -depleted vs. those not on ART. Compared to 
nTBs, dTBs exhibited short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and mycobacterial metabolism 
microbial pathway enrichment. People with additional non-pericardial involvement 
had differentially PF taxa (e.g., Mycobacterium -enrichment and Streptococcus 
-depletion associated with pulmonary infiltrates). Mycobacterium reads were in 
34% (31/91), 8% (2/25) and 17% (4/23) of dTBs, pTBs, and nTBs, respectively. 
β-diversity differed between patients with CRP above vs. below the median value 
( Pseudomonas -depleted). There was no correlation between enriched taxa in dTBs 
and CRP.
CONCLUSIONS: PF is compositionally distinct based on TB status, HIV (and ART) 
status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The clinical significance 
of these findings, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires 
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.04.26.24306431
PMCID: PMC11071582
PMID: 38712063

1. Environ Health. 2024 Apr 16;23(1):41. doi: 10.1186/s12940-024-01078-y.

Ambient long-term exposure to organophosphorus pesticides and the human gut 
microbiome: an observational study.

Zhang K(1), Paul K(2), Jacobs JP(3)(4), Cockburn MG(5), Bronstein JM(2), Del 
Rosario I(1), Ritz B(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 
CA, USA.
(3)The Vatche and Tamar Manoukian Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of 
Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Parenteral Nutrition, VA Greater 
Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Population and Public Health Sciences, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, UCLA Fielding School of Public Health, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA. britz@ucla.edu.
(7)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, UCLA Fielding School of Public 
Health, Los Angeles, CA, USA. britz@ucla.edu.

BACKGROUND: Organophosphorus pesticides (OP) have been associated with various 
human health conditions. Animal experiments and in-vitro models suggested that 
OP may also affect the gut microbiota. We examined associations between ambient 
chronic exposure to OP and gut microbial changes in humans.
METHODS: We recruited 190 participants from a community-based epidemiologic 
study of Parkinson's disease living in a region known for heavy agricultural 
pesticide use in California. Of these, 61% of participants had Parkinson's 
disease and their mean age was 72 years. Microbiome and predicted metagenome 
data were generated by 16S rRNA gene sequencing of fecal samples. Ambient 
long-term OP exposures were assessed using pesticide application records 
combined with residential addresses in a geographic information system. We 
examined gut microbiome differences due to OP exposures, specifically 
differences in microbial diversity based on the Shannon index and Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarities, and differential taxa abundance and predicted Metacyc pathway 
expression relying on regression models and adjusting for potential confounders.
RESULTS: OP exposure was not associated with alpha or beta diversity of the gut 
microbiome. However, the predicted metagenome was sparser and less evenly 
expressed among those highly exposed to OP (p = 0.04). Additionally, we found 
that the abundance of two bacterial families, 22 genera, and the predicted 
expression of 34 Metacyc pathways were associated with long-term OP exposure. 
These pathways included perturbed processes related to cellular respiration, 
increased biosynthesis and degradation of compounds related to bacterial wall 
structure, increased biosynthesis of RNA/DNA precursors, and decreased synthesis 
of Vitamin B1 and B6.
CONCLUSION: In support of previous animal studies and in-vitro findings, our 
results suggest that ambient chronic OP pesticide exposure alters gut microbiome 
composition and its predicted metabolism in humans.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12940-024-01078-y
PMCID: PMC11020204
PMID: 38627687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. World J Clin Pediatr. 2024 Mar 9;13(1):90755. doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v13.i1.90755. 
eCollection 2024 Mar 9.

Gut microbiota predicts the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis in Saudi children.

El Mouzan M(1), Al Sarkhy A(2), Assiri A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology Unit, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11461, Saudi Arabia. melmouzan@ksu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology Unit, King Saud University, Riyadh 
11461, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Ulcerative colitis (UC) is an immune-mediated chronic inflammatory 
condition with a worldwide distribution. Although the etiology of this disease 
is still unknown, the understanding of the role of the microbiota is becoming 
increasingly strong.
AIM: To investigate the predictive power of the gut microbiota for the diagnosis 
of UC in a cohort of newly diagnosed treatment-naïve Saudi children with UC.
METHODS: The study population included 20 children with a confirmed diagnosis of 
UC and 20 healthy controls. Microbial DNA was extracted and sequenced, and 
shotgun metagenomic analysis was performed for bacteria and bacteriophages. 
Biostatistics and bioinformatics demonstrated significant dysbiosis in the form 
of reduced alpha diversity, beta diversity, and significant difference of 
abundance of taxa between children with UC and control groups. The receiver 
operating characteristic curve, a probability curve, was used to determine the 
difference between the UC and control groups. The area under the curve (AUC) 
represents the degree of separability between the UC group and the control 
group. The AUC was calculated for all identified bacterial species and for 
bacterial species identified by the random forest classification algorithm as 
important potential biomarkers of UC. A similar method of AUC calculation for 
all bacteriophages and important species was used.
RESULTS: The median age and range were 14 (0.5-21) and 12.9 (6.8-16.3) years for 
children with UC and controls, respectively, and 40% and 35% were male for 
children with UC and controls, respectively. The AUC for all identified 
bacterial species was 89.5%. However, when using the bacterial species 
identified as important by random forest classification algorithm analysis, the 
accuracy increased to 97.6%. Similarly, the AUC for all the identified 
bacteriophages was 87.4%, but this value increased to 94.5% when the important 
bacteriophage biomarkers were used.
CONCLUSION: The very high to excellent AUCs of fecal bacterial and viral species 
suggest the potential use of noninvasive microbiota-based tests for the 
diagnosis of unusual cases of UC in children. In addition, the identification of 
important bacteria and bacteriophages whose abundance is reduced in children 
with UC suggests the potential of preventive and adjuvant microbial therapy for 
UC.

©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.5409/wjcp.v13.i1.90755
PMCID: PMC11000067
PMID: 38596448

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All authors have 
no conflicts of interest to disclose.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2333413. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2333413. 
Epub 2024 Apr 1.

Pathogen-specific alterations in intestinal microbiota precede urinary tract 
infections in preterm infants: a longitudinal case-control study.

Hong L(1), Huang Y(1), Han J(1), Li S(1), Zhang L(1), Zhou Q(1), Cao X(1), Yu 
W(1), Guo X(1), Yang Y(2), Zhou Y(2), Yan W(3), Hong S(4), Jiang S(1), Cao 
Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of Neonatal Diseases, Children's Hospital of Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.
(3)National Children's Medical Center, Department of Clinical Epidemiology of 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common late-onset infections 
in preterm infants, characterized by nonspecific symptoms and a pathogenic 
spectrum that diverges from that of term infants and older children, which 
present unique diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. Existing data on the role 
of gut microbiota in UTI pathogenesis in this demographic are limited. This 
study aims to investigate alterations in gut microbiota and fecal calprotectin 
levels and their association with the development of UTIs in hospitalized 
preterm infants. A longitudinal case-control study was conducted involving 
preterm infants admitted between January 2018 and October 2020. Fecal samples 
were collected weekly and analyzed for microbial profiles and calprotectin 
levels. Propensity score matching, accounting for key perinatal factors 
including age and antibiotic use, was utilized to match samples from 
UTI-diagnosed infants to those from non-UTI counterparts. Among the 151 preterm 
infants studied, 53 were diagnosed with a UTI, predominantly caused by 
Enterobacteriaceae (79.3%) and Enterococcaceae (19.0%). Infants with UTIs showed 
a significantly higher abundance of these families compared to non-UTI infants, 
for both Gram-negative and positive pathogens, respectively. Notably, there was 
a significant pre-UTI increase in the abundance of pathogen-specific taxa in 
infants later diagnosed with UTIs, offering high predictive value for early 
detection. Shotgun metagenomic sequencing further confirmed the dominance of 
specific pathogenic species pre-UTI and revealed altered virulence factor 
profiles associated with Klebsiella aerogenes and Escherichia coli infections. 
Additionally, a decline in fecal calprotectin levels was observed preceding UTI 
onset, particularly in cases involving Enterobacteriaceae. The observed 
pathogen-specific alterations in the gut microbiota preceding UTI onset offer 
novel insight into the UTI pathogenesis and promising early biomarkers for UTIs 
in preterm infants, potentially enhancing the timely management of this common 
infection. However, further validation in larger cohorts is essential to confirm 
these findings.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2333413
PMCID: PMC10986765
PMID: 38561312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Mar 14:2024.03.13.584859. doi: 
10.1101/2024.03.13.584859.

Expanding the human gut microbiome atlas of Africa.

Maghini DG(1)(2), Oduaran OH(1), Wirbel J(2), Olubayo LAI(1), Smyth N(1), 
Mathema T(1), Belger CW(1), Agongo G(3), Boua PR(1)(4), Choma SS(5), Gómez-Olivé 
FX(6), Kisiangani I(7), Mashaba GR(5), Micklesfield L(8), Mohamed SF(7), 
Nonterah EA(9), Norris S(8)(10), Sorgho H(4), Tollman S(6), Wafawanaka F(6), 
Tluway F(1), Ramsay M(1), Bhatt AS(11)(12), Hazelhurst S(1)(13).

Author information:
(1)Sydney Brenner Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(2)Department of Medicine (Hematology), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Forensic Sciences, C. K. Tedam University of 
Technology and Applied Sciences, Navrongo, Ghana.
(4)Clinical Research Unit of Nanoro, Institut de Recherche en Sciences de la 
Santé, Burkina Faso.
(5)DIMAMO Population Health Research Centre, University of Limpopo, South 
Africa.
(6)MRC/Wits Rural Public Health and Health Transitions Research Unit 
(Agincourt), Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Public Health, University of 
the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(7)African Population Health and Research Center, Nairobi, Kenya.
(8)SAMRC/Wits Developmental Pathways for Health Research Unit, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(9)Navrongo Health Research Centre, Ghana Health Science, Navrongo, Ghana.
(10)School of Human Development and Health, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Medicine (Hematology, Blood and Marrow Transplantation), 
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(12)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(13)School of Electrical & Information Engineering, University of the 
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.

Population studies are crucial in understanding the complex interplay between 
the gut microbiome and geographical, lifestyle, genetic, and environmental 
factors. However, populations from low- and middle-income countries, which 
represent ~84% of the world population, have been excluded from large-scale gut 
microbiome research. Here, we present the AWI-Gen 2 Microbiome Project, a 
cross-sectional gut microbiome study sampling 1,803 women from Burkina Faso, 
Ghana, Kenya, and South Africa. By intensively engaging with communities that 
range from rural and horticultural to urban informal settlements and 
post-industrial, we capture population diversity that represents a far greater 
breadth of the world's population. Using shotgun metagenomic sequencing, we find 
that study site explains substantially more microbial variation than disease 
status. We identify taxa with strong geographic and lifestyle associations, 
including loss of Treponema and Cryptobacteroides species and gain of 
Bifidobacterium species in urban populations. We uncover a wealth of prokaryotic 
and viral novelty, including 1,005 new bacterial metagenome-assembled genomes, 
and identify phylogeography signatures in Treponema succinifaciens. Finally, we 
find a microbiome signature of HIV infection that is defined by several taxa not 
previously associated with HIV, including Dysosmobacter welbionis and 
Enterocloster sp. This study represents the largest population-representative 
survey of gut metagenomes of African individuals to date, and paired with 
extensive clinical biomarkers, demographic data, and lifestyle information, 
provides extensive opportunity for microbiome-related discovery and research.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.03.13.584859
PMCID: PMC10980044
PMID: 38559015

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 May 2;12(5):e0416623. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.04166-23. 
Epub 2024 Apr 1.

Metagenomic next-generation sequencing of nasopharyngeal microbiota in COVID-19 
patients with different disease severities.

Aljabr W(1)(2), Dandachi I(1), Abbas B(3), Karkashan A(3), Al-Amari A(4), 
AlShahrani D(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Center, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Science, University of Jeddah, 
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Dar Al-Uloom 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Pediatric infectious diseases, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, extensive research has been conducted on 
SARS-COV-2 to elucidate its genome, prognosis, and possible treatments. However, 
few looked at the microbial markers that could be explored in infected patients 
and that could predict possible disease severity. The aim of this study is to 
compare the nasopharyngeal microbiota of healthy subjects, moderate, under 
medication, and recovered SARS-COV-2 patients. In 2020, 38 nasopharyngeal swabs 
were collected from 6 healthy subjects, 14 moderates, 10 under medication and 8 
recovered SARS-COV-2 patients at the Prince Mohammed Bin Abdulaziz Hospital 
Riyadh. Metatranscriptomic sequencing was performed using Minion Oxford nanopore 
sequencing. No significant difference in alpha as well as beta diversity was 
observed among all four categories. Nevertheless, we have found that 
Streptococcus spp including Streptococcus pneumoniae and Streptococcus 
thermophilus were among the top 15 most abundant species detected in COVID-19 
patients but not in healthy subjects. The genus Staphylococcus was found to be 
associated with COVID-19 patients compared to healthy subjects. Furthermore, the 
abundance of Leptotrichia was significantly higher in healthy subjects compared 
to recovered patients. Corynebacterium on the other hand, was associated with 
under-medication patients. Taken together, our study revealed no differences in 
the overall microbial composition between healthy subjects and COVID-19 
patients. Significant differences were seen only at specific taxonomic level. 
Future studies should explore the nasopharyngeal microbiota between controls and 
COVID-19 patients while controlling for confounders including age, gender, and 
comorbidities; since these latter could affect the results and accordingly the 
interpretation.IMPORTANCEIn this work, no significant difference in the 
microbial diversity was seen between healthy subjects and COVID-19 patients. 
Changes in specific taxa including Leptotrichia, Staphylococcus, and 
Corynebacterium were only observed. Leptotrichia was significantly higher in 
healthy subjects, whereas Staphylococcus and Corynebacterium were mostly 
associated with COVID-19, and specifically with under-medication SARS-COV-2 
patients, respectively. Although the COVID-19 pandemic has ended, the SARS-COV-2 
virus is continuously evolving and the emergence of new variants causing more 
severe disease should be always kept in mind. Microbial markers in SARS-COV-2 
infected patients can be useful in the early suspicion of the disease, 
predicting clinical outcomes, framing hospital and intensive care unit admission 
as well as, risk stratification. Data on which microbial marker to tackle is 
still controversial and more work is needed, hence the importance of this study.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.04166-23
PMCID: PMC11237758
PMID: 38557102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Mar 26;12(1):64. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01761-9.

Placental TLR recognition of salivary and subgingival microbiota is associated 
with pregnancy complications.

Pax K(1), Buduneli N(2), Alan M(3), Meric P(2), Gurlek O(2), Dabdoub SM(4), 
Kumar PS(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral Biosciences, College of Dentistry, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, 43210, USA.
(2)Faculty of Clinical Sciences, Department of Periodontology, Ege University, 
İzmir, Turkey.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Izmir Tepecik Training and Research 
Hospital, Tepecik, 35120, Izmir, Türkiye.
(4)Department of Periodontics, Division of Biostatistics and Computational 
Biology, The University of Iowa School of Dentistry, Iowa City, IA, 52242-1010, 
USA.
(5)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, School of Dentistry, University 
of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 48109, USA. kpurnima@umich.edu.

BACKGROUND: Pre-term birth, the leading cause of neonatal mortality, has been 
associated with maternal periodontal disease and the presence of oral pathogens 
in the placenta. However, the mechanisms that underpin this link are not known. 
This investigation aimed to identify the origins of placental microbiota and to 
interrogate the association between parturition complications and immune 
recognition of placental microbial motifs. Video Abstract METHODS: Saliva, 
plaque, serum, and placenta were collected during 130 full-term (FT), pre-term 
(PT), or pre-term complicated by pre-eclampsia (PTPE) deliveries and subjected 
to whole-genome shotgun sequencing. Real-time quantitative PCR was used to 
measure toll-like receptors (TLR) 1-10 expression in placental samples. Source 
tracking was employed to trace the origins of the placental microbiota.
RESULTS: We discovered 10,007 functionally annotated genes representing 420 taxa 
in the placenta that could not be attributed to contamination. Placental 
microbial composition was the biggest discriminator of pregnancy complications, 
outweighing hypertension, BMI, smoking, and maternal age. A machine-learning 
algorithm trained on this microbial dataset predicted PTPE and PT with error 
rates of 4.05% and 8.6% (taxonomy) and 6.21% and 7.38% (function). Logistic 
regression revealed 32% higher odds of parturition complication (95% CI 2.8%, 
81%) for every IQR increase in the Shannon diversity index after adjusting for 
maternal smoking status, maternal age, and gravida. We also discovered distinct 
expression patterns of TLRs that detect RNA- and DNA-containing antigens in the 
three groups, with significant upregulation of TLR9, and concomitant 
downregulation of TLR7 in PTPE and PT groups, and dense correlation networks 
between microbial genes and these TLRs. 70-82% of placental microbiota were 
traced to serum and thence to the salivary and subgingival microbiomes. The oral 
and serum microbiomes of PTPE and PT groups displayed significant enrichment of 
genes encoding iron transport, exosome, adhesion, quorum sensing, 
lipopolysaccharide, biofilm, and steroid degradation.
CONCLUSIONS: Within the limits of cross-sectional analysis, we find evidence to 
suggest that oral bacteria might translocate to the placenta via serum and 
trigger immune signaling pathways capable of inducing placental vascular 
pathology. This might explain, in part, the higher incidence of obstetric 
syndromes in women with periodontal disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01761-9
PMCID: PMC10964645
PMID: 38532461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Environ Pollut. 2024 May 1;348:123849. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2024.123849. Epub
 2024 Mar 22.

The relationship between water quality and the microbial virulome and resistome 
in urban streams in Brazil.

Stehling EG(1), Furlan JPR(2), Lopes R(3), Chodkowski J(4), Stopnisek N(5), 
Savazzi EA(6), Shade A(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Analyses, Toxicology and Food Science, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Electronic address: elianags@usp.br.
(2)Department of Clinical Analyses, Toxicology and Food Science, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Electronic address: jpedro.rueda@usp.br.
(3)Department of Clinical Analyses, Toxicology and Food Science, School of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Brazil. 
Electronic address: rmouralopes@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University 
(MSU) - East Lansing, United States. Electronic address: 
john.chodkowski@gmail.com.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Michigan State University 
(MSU) - East Lansing, United States; National Laboratory of Health, Environment 
and Food - Maribor, Slovenia. Electronic address: nejcstopno@gmail.com.
(6)Environmental Company of São Paulo State, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. Electronic 
address: esavazzi@sp.gov.br.
(7)Universite Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Laboratoire d'Ecologie Microbienne, UMR 
CNRS 5557, UMR INRAE 1418, VetAgro Sup, 69622, Villeurbanne, France. Electronic 
address: shadeash@msu.edu.

Urban streams that receive untreated domestic and hospital waste can transmit 
infectious diseases and spread drug residues, including antimicrobials, which 
can then increase the selection of antimicrobial-resistant bacteria. Here, water 
samples were collected from three different urban streams in the state of São 
Paulo, Brazil, to relate their range of Water Quality Indices (WQIs) to the 
diversity and composition of aquatic microbial taxa, virulence genes (virulome), 
and antimicrobial resistance determinants (resistome), all assessed using 
untargeted metagenome sequencing. There was a predominance of phyla 
Proteobacteria, Actinobacteria, and Bacteroidetes in all samples, and 
Pseudomonas was the most abundant detected genus. Virulence genes associated 
with motility, adherence, and secretion systems were highly abundant and mainly 
associated with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Furthermore, some opportunistic 
pathogenic genera had negative correlations with WQI. Many clinically relevant 
antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) and efflux pump-encoding genes that confer 
resistance to critically important antimicrobials were detected. The highest 
relative abundances of ARGs were β-lactams and 
macrolide-lincosamide-streptogramin. No statistically supported relationship was 
detected between the abundance of virulome/resistome and collection type/WQI. On 
the other hand, total solids were a weak predictor of gene abundance patterns. 
These results provide insights into various microbial outcomes given urban 
stream quality and point to its ecological complexity. In addition, this study 
suggests potential consequences for human health as mediated by aquatic 
microbial communities responding to typical urban outputs.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2024.123849
PMID: 38522607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. FEMS Microbiol Ecol. 2024 Mar 12;100(4):fiae024. doi: 10.1093/femsec/fiae024.

Rhizoctonia solani disease suppression: addition of keratin-rich soil amendment 
leads to functional shifts in soil microbial communities.

Russ L(1), Andreo Jimenez B(1), Nijhuis E(1), Postma J(1).

Author information:
(1)Wageningen Plant Research, Wageningen University & Research, 
Droevendaalsesteeg 1, 6708 PB Wageningen, The Netherlands.

Promoting soil suppressiveness against soil borne pathogens could be a promising 
strategy to manage crop diseases. One way to increase the suppression potential 
in agricultural soils is via the addition of organic amendments. This 
microbe-mediated phenomenon, although not fully understood, prompted our study 
to explore the microbial taxa and functional properties associated with 
Rhizoctonia solani disease suppression in sugar beet seedlings after amending 
soil with a keratin-rich waste stream. Soil samples were analyzed using shotgun 
metagenomics sequencing. Results showed that both amended soils were enriched in 
bacterial families found in disease suppressive soils before, indicating that 
the amendment of keratin-rich material can support the transformation into a 
suppressive soil. On a functional level, genes encoding keratinolytic enzymes 
were found to be abundant in the keratin-amended samples. Proteins enriched in 
amended soils were those potentially involved in the production of secondary 
metabolites/antibiotics, motility, keratin-degradation, and contractile 
secretion system proteins. We hypothesize these taxa contribute to the 
amendment-induced suppression effect due to their genomic potential to produce 
antibiotics, secrete effectors via the contractile secretion system, and degrade 
oxalate-a potential virulence factor of R. solani-while simultaneously 
possessing the ability to metabolize keratin.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of FEMS.

DOI: 10.1093/femsec/fiae024
PMCID: PMC10959553
PMID: 38499445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

1. Front Plant Sci. 2024 Feb 29;15:1352997. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2024.1352997. 
eCollection 2024.

Metagenomic insight to apprehend the fungal communities associated with leaf 
blight of Welsh onion in Taiwan.

Jayasinghe H(1), Chang HX(1), Knobloch S(2), Yang SH(3), Hendalage DPB(4), 
Ariyawansa KGSU(4), Liu PY(5), Stadler M(6), Ariyawansa HA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Food Technology, Fulda University of Applied Sciences, Fulda, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Fisheries Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Plant Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Colombo, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka.
(5)School of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Sun Yat-Sen University, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Department Microbial Drugs, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research GmbH 
(HZI), Braunschweig, Germany.

Plants are associated with a large diversity of microbes, and these complex 
plant-associated microbial communities are critical for plant health. Welsh 
onion (Allium fistulosum L.) is one of the key and oldest vegetable crops 
cultivated in Taiwan. The leaf of the Welsh onion is one of the famous spices in 
Taiwanese cuisine, thus, it is crucial to control foliar diseases. In recent 
years, Welsh onion cultivation in Taiwan has been severely threatened by the 
occurrence of leaf blight disease, greatly affecting their yield and quality. 
However, the overall picture of microbiota associated with the Welsh onion plant 
is still not clear as most of the recent etiological investigations were heavily 
based on the isolation of microorganisms from diseased plants. Therefore, 
studying the diversity of fungal communities associated with the leaf blight 
symptoms of Welsh onion may provide information regarding key taxa possibly 
involved in the disease. Therefore, this investigation was mainly designed to 
understand the major fungal communities associated with leaf blight to identify 
key taxa potentially involved in the disease and further evaluate any shifts in 
both phyllosphere and rhizosphere mycobiome assembly due to foliar pathogen 
infection by amplicon sequencing targeting the Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) 
1 region of the rRNA. The alpha and beta-diversity analyses were used to compare 
the fungal communities and significant fungal groups were recognized based on 
linear discriminant analyses. Based on the results of relative abundance data 
and co-occurrence networks in symptomatic plants we revealed that the leaf 
blight of Welsh onion in Sanxing, is a disease complex mainly involving 
Stemphylium and Colletotrichum taxa. In addition, genera such as Aspergillus, 
Athelia and Colletotrichum were abundantly found associated with the symptomatic 
rhizosphere. Alpha-diversity in some fields indicated a significant increase in 
species richness in the symptomatic phyllosphere compared to the asymptomatic 
phyllosphere. These results will broaden our knowledge of pathogens of Welsh 
onion associated with leaf blight symptoms and will assist in developing 
effective disease management strategies to control the progress of the disease.

Copyright © 2024 Jayasinghe, Chang, Knobloch, Yang, Hendalage, Ariyawansa, Liu, 
Stadler and Ariyawansa.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2024.1352997
PMCID: PMC10941342
PMID: 38495366

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Access Microbiol. 2024 Feb 20;6(2):000653.v3. doi: 10.1099/acmi.0.000653.v3. 
eCollection 2024.

Metagenomics analysis of mice gut microbiome to unravel the role of metal 
exposure and piperine.

Kaur R(1)(2), Singh DP(2), Rawal R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Forensic Science, University School of 
Sciences, Gujarat University, Ahmedabad-380009, Gujarat, India.
(2)Division of Biosciences, ICMR- National Institute of Occupational Health, 
Meghani Nagar, Ahmedabad-380016, Gujarat, India.

The gut and intestinal microbiota consists of trillions of microorganisms 
inhabiting the human gastrointestinal tract. It plays a crucial role in human 
health leading to understanding the dynamic crosstalk of host-microbe 
interaction in the gut and has become necessary for the detection, prevention, 
or therapy of diseases. Gut microbiota deviations are linked with many diseases, 
suggesting that various pathways involved in immunity, energy, lipid, and 
glucose metabolism are affected. Further, it is also altered by external insults 
such as metal toxicity, antibiotics and pesticides. Heavy metals like arsenic, 
mercury, cadmium and chromium are some of the well-studied classes of 
environmental pollutants. Mouse models have become the model of choice for most 
studies in this emerging field, as they allow perturbations in the gut 
microbiota to be studied in a controlled experimental setup. Here, we 
investigate the composition and diversity of intestinal microbes utilizing cecal 
samples from different intervention groups: arsenic exposure (As(III)), arsenic 
and piperine co-administration (As +Pp), piperine per se and control group. We 
obtained DNA samples from these groups and performed PCR amplification and 
sequencing of the 16S V3-V4 region. The findings showed shift in microbial 
composition and abundance among different intervention groups, revealing taxa 
that may contribute to the microbial diversity.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1099/acmi.0.000653.v3
PMCID: PMC10928389
PMID: 38482351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Int J Hyg Environ Health. 2024 May;258:114345. doi:
10.1016/j.ijheh.2024.114345.  Epub 2024 Mar 11.

Metagenomics insights into microbiome and antibiotic resistance genes from free 
living amoeba in chlorinated wastewater effluents.

Conco-Biyela T(1), Malla MA(1), Olatunji Awolusi O(1), Allam M(2), Ismail A(3), 
Stenström TA(1), Bux F(1), Kumari S(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology, Durban University of 
Technology, Durban, 4001, Kwa-Zulu Natal, South Africa.
(2)NICD Sequencing Core Facility, National Institute for Communicable Diseases, 
Sandringham, 2192, Pretoria, South Africa; Department of Genetics and Genomics, 
College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology, Durban University of 
Technology, Durban, 4001, Kwa-Zulu Natal, South Africa; NICD Sequencing Core 
Facility, National Institute for Communicable Diseases, Sandringham, 2192, 
Pretoria, South Africa.
(4)Institute for Water and Wastewater Technology, Durban University of 
Technology, Durban, 4001, Kwa-Zulu Natal, South Africa. Electronic address: 
sheenak1@dut.ac.za.

Free living amoeba (FLA) are among the organisms commonly found in wastewater 
and are well-established hosts for diverse microbial communities. Despite its 
clinical significance, there is little knowledge on the FLA microbiome and 
resistome, with previous studies relying mostly on conventional approaches. In 
this study we comprehensively analyzed the microbiome, antibiotic resistome and 
virulence factors (VFs) within FLA isolated from final treated effluents of two 
wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) using shotgun metagenomics. Acanthamoeba has 
been identified as the most common FLA, followed by Entamoeba. The bacterial 
diversity showed no significant difference (p > 0.05) in FLA microbiomes 
obtained from the two WWTPs. At phylum level, the most dominant taxa were 
Proteobacteria, followed by Firmicutes and Actinobacteria. The most abundant 
genera identified were Enterobacter followed by Citrobacter, Paenibacillus, and 
Cupriavidus. The latter three genera are reported here for the first time in 
Acanthamoeba. In total, we identified 43 types of ARG conferring resistance to 
cephalosporins, phenicol, streptomycin, trimethoprim, quinolones, 
cephalosporins, tigecycline, rifamycin, and kanamycin. Similarly, a variety of 
VFs in FLA metagenomes were detected which included flagellar proteins, Type IV 
pili twitching motility proteins (pilH and rpoN), alginate biosynthesis genes 
AlgI, AlgG, AlgD and AlgW and Type VI secretion system proteins and general 
secretion pathway proteins (tssM, tssA, tssL, tssK, tssJ, fha, tssG, tssF, tssC 
and tssB, gspC, gspE, gspD, gspF, gspG, gspH, gspI, gspJ, gspK, and gspM). To 
the best of our knowledge, this is the first study of its kind to examine both 
the microbiomes and resistome in FLA, as well as their potential pathogenicity 
in treated effluents. Additionally, this study showed that FLA can host a 
variety of potentially pathogenic bacteria including Paenibacillus, and 
Cupriavidus that had not previously been reported, indicating that their 
relationship may play a role in the spread and persistence of antibiotic 
resistant bacteria (ARBs) and antibiotic resistance genes (ARGs) as well as the 
evolution of novel pathogens.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijheh.2024.114345
PMID: 38471337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Mar 3:2024.02.28.582610. doi: 
10.1101/2024.02.28.582610.

Systems genetics approach uncovers associations between host amylase locus, gut 
microbiome and metabolic traits in hyperlipidemic mice.

Zhang Q(1), Hutchison ER(1), Pan C(2)(3), Warren MF(1), Keller MP(4), Attie 
AD(4), Lusis AJ(2)(3), Rey FE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, 
USA.

The molecular basis for how host genetic variation impacts gut microbial 
community and bacterial metabolic niches remain largely unknown. We leveraged 90 
inbred hyperlipidemic mouse strains from the Hybrid Mouse Diversity Panel 
(HMDP), previously studied for a variety of cardio-metabolic traits. Metagenomic 
analysis of cecal DNA followed by genome-wide association analysis identified 
genomic loci that were associated with microbial enterotypes in the gut. Among 
these we detected a genetic locus surrounding multiple amylase genes that was 
associated with abundances of Firmicutes (Lachnospiraceae family) and 
Bacteroidetes (Muribaculaceae family) taxa encoding distinct starch and sugar 
metabolism functions. We also found that lower amylase gene number in the mouse 
genome was associated with higher gut Muribaculaceae levels. Previous work 
suggests that modulation of host amylase activity impacts the availability of 
carbohydrates to the host and potentially to gut bacteria. The genetic variants 
described above were associated with distinct gut microbial communities 
(enterotypes) with different predicted metabolic capacities for carbohydrate 
degradation. Mendelian randomization analysis revealed host phenotypes, 
including liver fibrosis and plasma HDL-cholesterol levels, that were associated 
with gut microbiome enterotypes. This work reveals novel relationships between 
host genetic variation, gut microbial enterotypes and host physiology/disease 
phenotypes in mice.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.02.28.582610
PMCID: PMC10925268
PMID: 38464150

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. ERJ Open Res. 2024 Mar 4;10(2):01008-2023. doi: 10.1183/23120541.01008-2023. 
eCollection 2024 Mar.

Sputum metagenomics of people with bronchiectasis.

Rosenboom I(1), Thavarasa A(1), Richardson H(2), Long MB(2), Wiehlmann L(3), 
Davenport CF(3), Shoemark A(2), Chalmers JD(2), Tümmler B(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Pneumology, Allergology and Neonatology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Division of Molecular and Clinical Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, 
UK.
(3)Research Core Unit Genomics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Biomedical Research in Endstage and Obstructive Lung Disease (BREATH), German 
Centre for Lung Research, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The microbiota in the sputum of people with bronchiectasis has 
repeatedly been investigated in cohorts of different geographic origin, but so 
far has not been studied to the species level in comparison to control 
populations including healthy adults and smokers without lung disease.
METHODS: The microbial metagenome from sputa of 101 European Bronchiectasis 
Registry (EMBARC) study participants was examined by using whole-genome shotgun 
sequencing.
RESULTS: Our analysis of the metagenome of people with bronchiectasis revealed 
four clusters characterised by a predominance of Haemophilus influenzae, 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa or polymicrobial communities with varying compositions of 
nonpathogenic commensals and opportunistic pathogens. The metagenomes of the 
severely affected patients showed individual profiles characterised by low alpha 
diversity. Importantly, nearly 50% of patients with severe disease were grouped 
in a cluster characterised by commensals. Comparisons with the sputum 
metagenomes of healthy smokers and healthy nonsmokers revealed a gradient of 
depletion of taxa in bronchiectasis, most often Neisseria subflava, 
Fusobacterium periodonticum and Eubacterium sulci.
CONCLUSION: The gradient of depletion of commensal taxa found in healthy airways 
is a key feature of bronchiectasis associated with disease severity.

Copyright ©The authors 2024.

DOI: 10.1183/23120541.01008-2023
PMCID: PMC10910388
PMID: 38444657

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: A. Shoemark reports 
consulting fees from Spirovant and Translate Bio. Conflict of interest: J.D. 
Chalmers reports grants or contracts from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Insmed, Gilead Sciences, Novartis, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline and Trudell; fees 
from AstraZeneca, Boehringer Ingelheim, Insmed, Gilead Sciences, Novartis, 
Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Trudell, Zambon, CSL Behring, Janssen and Antabio; 
and is an associate editor of this journal. Conflict of interest: B. Tümmler 
reports grants from Vertex Pharmaceuticals. Conflict of interest: All other 
authors have nothing to disclose.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Feb 19;15:1301073. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1301073. 
eCollection 2024.

Christensenella minuta interacts with multiple gut bacteria.

Xu C(#)(1), Jiang H(#)(1), Feng LJ(1), Jiang MZ(1), Wang YL(1), Liu SJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Qingdao, 
China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Gut microbes form complex networks that significantly influence 
host health and disease treatment. Interventions with the probiotic bacteria on 
the gut microbiota have been demonstrated to improve host well-being. As a 
representative of next-generation probiotics, Christensenella minuta (C. minuta) 
plays a critical role in regulating energy balance and metabolic homeostasis in 
human bodies, showing potential in treating metabolic disorders and reducing 
inflammation. However, interactions of C. minuta with the members of the 
networked gut microbiota have rarely been explored.
METHODS: In this study, we investigated the impact of C. minuta on fecal 
microbiota via metagenomic sequencing, focusing on retrieving bacterial strains 
and coculture assays of C. minuta with associated microbial partners.
RESULTS: Our results showed that C. minuta intervention significantly reduced 
the diversity of fecal microorganisms, but specifically enhanced some groups of 
bacteria, such as Lactobacillaceae. C. minuta selectively enriched bacterial 
pathways that compensated for its metabolic defects on vitamin B1, B12, serine, 
and glutamate synthesis. Meanwhile, C. minuta cross-feeds Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii and other bacteria via the production of arginine, branched-chain 
amino acids, fumaric acids and short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), such as acetic. 
Both metagenomic data analysis and culture experiments revealed that C. minuta 
negatively correlated with Klebsiella pneumoniae and 14 other bacterial taxa, 
while positively correlated with F. prausnitzii. Our results advance our 
comprehension of C. minuta's in modulating the gut microbial network.
CONCLUSIONS: C. minuta disrupts the composition of the fecal microbiota. This 
disturbance is manifested through cross-feeding, nutritional competition, and 
supplementation of its own metabolic deficiencies, resulting in the specific 
enrichment or inhibition of the growth of certain bacteria. This study will shed 
light on the application of C. minuta as a probiotic for effective interventions 
on gut microbiomes and improvement of host health.

Copyright © 2024 Xu, Jiang, Feng, Jiang, Wang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1301073
PMCID: PMC10910051
PMID: 38440147

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Eco Environ Health. 2023 Aug 22;2(4):208-218. doi: 10.1016/j.eehl.2023.08.001.
 eCollection 2023 Dec.

Indoor metabolites and chemicals outperform microbiome in classifying childhood 
asthma and allergic rhinitis.

Sun Y(1), Tang H(2), Du S(2), Chen Y(1), Ou Z(1), Zhang M(1), Chen Z(2), Tang 
Z(3), Zhang D(3), Chen T(2), Xu Y(2), Li J(2), Norback D(4), Hashim JH(5), 
Hashim Z(6), Shao J(3), Fu X(7), Zhao Z(2)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein Function and Regulation in 
Agricultural Organisms, College of Life Sciences, South China Agricultural 
University, Guangzhou 510642, China.
(2)Department of Environmental Health, School of Public Health, Fudan 
University, NHC Key Laboratory of Health Technology Assessment (Fudan 
University), Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Ruijin Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala SE-751, Sweden.
(5)Department of Environmental Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Universiti 
Selangor, Shah Alam 40000, Malaysia.
(6)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Faculty of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, UPM, Serdang 43400, Malaysia.
(7)Guangdong Provincial Engineering Research Center of Public Health Detection 
and Assessment, School of Public Health, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, 
Guangzhou 510006, China.
(8)Key Laboratory of Public Health Safety of the Ministry of Education, Shanghai 
Typhoon Institute/CMA, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Meteorology and Health, 
Shanghai 200030, China.
(9)IRDR International Center of Excellence on Risk Interconnectivity and 
Governance on Weather/Climate Extremes Impact and Public Health, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200438, China.
(10)WMO/IGAC MAP-AQ Asian Office Shanghai, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, 
China.

Indoor microorganisms impact asthma and allergic rhinitis (AR), but the 
associated microbial taxa often vary extensively due to climate and geographical 
variations. To provide more consistent environmental assessments, new 
perspectives on microbial exposure for asthma and AR are needed. Home dust from 
97 cases (32 asthma alone, 37 AR alone, 28 comorbidity) and 52 age- and 
gender-matched controls in Shanghai, China, were analyzed using high-throughput 
shotgun metagenomic sequencing and liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry. 
Homes of healthy children were enriched with environmental microbes, including 
Paracoccus, Pseudomonas, and Psychrobacter, and metabolites like keto acids, 
indoles, pyridines, and flavonoids (astragalin, hesperidin) (False Discovery 
Rate < 0.05). A neural network co-occurrence probability analysis revealed that 
environmental microorganisms were involved in producing these keto acids, 
indoles, and pyridines. Conversely, homes of diseased children were enriched 
with mycotoxins and synthetic chemicals, including herbicides, insecticides, and 
food/cosmetic additives. Using a random forest model, characteristic metabolites 
and microorganisms in Shanghai homes were used to classify high and low 
prevalence of asthma/AR in an independent dataset in Malaysian schools 
(N = 1290). Indoor metabolites achieved an average accuracy of 74.9% and 77.1% 
in differentiating schools with high and low prevalence of asthma and AR, 
respectively, whereas indoor microorganisms only achieved 51.0% and 59.5%, 
respectively. These results suggest that indoor metabolites and chemicals rather 
than indoor microbiome are potentially superior environmental indicators for 
childhood asthma and AR. This study extends the traditional risk assessment 
focusing on allergens or air pollutants in childhood asthma and AR, thereby 
revealing potential novel intervention strategies for these diseases.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.eehl.2023.08.001
PMCID: PMC10902507
PMID: 38435359

1. Front Plant Sci. 2024 Feb 16;15:1325141. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2024.1325141. 
eCollection 2024.

Metagenomic insights into the response of soil microbial communities to 
pathogenic Ralstonia solanacearum.

Xiao Y(1), Zhang S(1), Li H(1), Teng K(2), Wu S(3), Liu Y(1), Yu F(1), He Z(1), 
Li L(1), Li L(4), Meng D(4), Yin H(4), Wang Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Chenzhou Tobacco Company of Hunan Province, Changsha, China.
(2)Xiangxi Tobacco Co Hunan Prov, Changsha, China.
(3)Hunan Tobacco Research Institute, Changsha, China.
(4)School of Minerals Processing and Bioengineering, Central South University, 
Changsha, China.

Understanding the response of soil microbial communities to pathogenic Ralstonia 
solanacearum is crucial for preventing bacterial wilt outbreaks. In this study, 
we investigated the soil physicochemical and microbial community to assess their 
impact on the pathogenic R.solanacearum through metagenomics. Our results 
revealed that certain archaeal taxa were the main contributors influencing the 
health of plants. Additionally, the presence of the pathogen showed a strong 
negative correlation with soil phosphorus levels, while soil phosphorus was 
significantly correlated with bacterial and archaeal communities. We found that 
the network of microbial interactions in healthy plant rhizosphere soils was 
more complex compared to diseased soils. The diseased soil network had more 
linkages, particularly related to the pathogen occurrence. Within the network, 
the family Comamonadaceae, specifically Ramlibacter_tataouinensis, was enriched 
in healthy samples and showed a significantly negative correlation with the 
pathogen. In terms of archaea, Halorubrum, Halorussus_halophilus (family: 
Halobacteriaceae), and Natronomonas_pharaonis (family: Haloarculaceae) were 
enriched in healthy plant rhizosphere soils and showed negative correlations 
with R.solanacearum. These findings suggested that the presence of these archaea 
may potentially reduce the occurrence of bacterial wilt disease. On the other 
hand, Halostagnicola_larseniia and Haloterrigena_sp._BND6 (family: 
Natrialbaceae) had higher relative abundance in diseased plants and exhibited 
significantly positive correlations with R.solanacearum, indicating their 
potential contribution to the pathogen's occurrence. Moreover, we explored the 
possibility of functional gene sharing among the correlating bacterial pairs 
within the Molecular Ecological Network. Our analysis revealed 468 entries of 
horizontal gene transfer (HGT) events, emphasizing the significance of HGT in 
shaping the adaptive traits of plant-associated bacteria, particularly in 
relation to host colonization and pathogenicity. Overall, this work revealed key 
factors, patterns and response mechanisms underlying the rhizosphere soil 
microbial populations. The findings offer valuable guidance for effectively 
controlling soil-borne bacterial diseases and developing sustainable agriculture 
practices.

Copyright © 2024 Xiao, Zhang, Li, Teng, Wu, Liu, Yu, He, Li, Li, Meng, Yin and 
Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2024.1325141
PMCID: PMC10904623
PMID: 38434434

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 10;25(4):2164. doi: 10.3390/ijms25042164.

Changes in HLA-B27 Transgenic Rat Fecal Microbiota Following Tofacitinib 
Treatment and Ileocecal Resection Surgery: Implications for Crohn's Disease 
Management.

Blondeaux A(1)(2), Valibouze C(1)(2), Speca S(1), Rousseaux C(3), Dubuquoy C(3), 
Blanquart H(4), Zerbib P(1)(2), Desreumaux P(1)(2), Foligné B(1), Titécat M(1).

Author information:
(1)U1286-INFINITE-Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, CHU 
Lille, Inserm, Univ. Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.
(2)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Lille University Hospital, 59037 
Lille, France.
(3)Intestinal Biotech Development, 1 Avenue Oscar Lambret, 59045 Lille, France.
(4)GenoScreen, 1 Rue du Pr Calmette, 59000 Lille, France.

The therapeutic management of Crohn's disease (CD), a chronic 
relapsing-remitting inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is highly challenging. 
Surgical resection is sometimes a necessary procedure even though it is often 
associated with postoperative recurrences (PORs). Tofacitinib, an orally active 
small molecule Janus kinase inhibitor, is an anti-inflammatory drug meant to 
limit PORs in CD. Whereas bidirectional interactions between the gut microbiota 
and the relevant IBD drug are crucial, little is known about the impact of 
tofacitinib on the gut microbiota. The HLA-B27 transgenic rat is a good 
preclinical model used in IBD research, including for PORs after ileocecal 
resection (ICR). In the present study, we used shotgun metagenomics to first 
delineate the baseline composition and determinants of the fecal microbiome of 
HLA-B27 rats and then to evaluate the distinct impact of either tofacitinib 
treatment, ileocecal resection or the cumulative effect of both interventions on 
the gut microbiota in these HLA-B27 rats. The results confirmed that the 
microbiome of the HLA-B27 rats was fairly different from their wild-type 
littermates. We demonstrated here that oral treatment with tofacitinib does not 
affect the gut microbial composition of HLA-B27 rats. Of note, we showed that 
ICR induced an intense loss of bacterial diversity together with dramatic 
changes in taxa relative abundances. However, the oral treatment with 
tofacitinib neither modified the alpha-diversity nor exacerbated significant 
modifications in bacterial taxa induced by ICR. Collectively, these preclinical 
data are rather favorable for the use of tofacitinib in combination with ICR to 
address Crohn's disease management when considering microbiota.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25042164
PMCID: PMC10889215
PMID: 38396840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Christel Rousseaux and Caroline Dubuquoy 
were employed by the company “Intestinal Biotech Development”. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as potential conflicts of 
interest. P.D. reports personal fees from several pharmaceutical companies, 
Abbott, Amgen, Biocodex, Biofortis, Biogen, Biokuris, Ferring, Fresenius, 
Janssen Kitozyme, Lesaffre, MSD, Norgine, Pfizer, Sandoz, Shire, Takeda, 
Tillotts, and UCB, outside of the submitted work. All other authors have nothing 
to disclose. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of the data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results. The other authors declare 
no conflicts of interest.

1. Transplant Direct. 2024 Feb 16;10(3):e1582. doi: 10.1097/TXD.0000000000001582.
 eCollection 2024 Mar.

Distinct Changes in Gut Microbiota of Patients With Kidney Graft Rejection.

Visconti V(1)(2), Wirtz S(3), Schiffer M(1)(2), Müller-Deile J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Research Center On Rare Kidney Diseases (RECORD), University Hospital 
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(3)Medical Department 1, University Hospital Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Kidney graft rejection still represents the major cause of graft 
loss in kidney transplant recipients. Of growing interest is the bidirectional 
relationship between gut microbiome and immune system suggesting that gut 
microbiota can affect allograft outcome.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional case-control study, we characterized the gut 
microbial profile of adult renal transplant recipients with and without graft 
rejection to define a cohort-specific microbial fingerprint through 16S 
ribosomal RNA gene sequencing. We used very strict inclusion and exclusion 
criteria to address confounder of microbiota composition.
RESULTS: Different relative abundances in several gut microbial taxa were 
detectable in control patients compared with patients with kidney allograft 
rejection. Alpha diversity was lower in the rejection group and beta diversity 
revealed dissimilarity between patients with and without kidney graft rejection 
(P < 0.01). When the rejection group was stratified according to different types 
of allograft rejection, major changes were identified between patients with 
chronic T-cellular-mediated rejection and controls. Changes in alpha diversity 
within the gut microbiome were related to the probability of chronic 
T-cellular-mediated rejection (P < 0.05). Kidney transplant patients without 
rejection showed significant enrichment of rather anti-inflammatory taxa whereas 
in the rejection group bacteria well known for their role in chronic 
inflammation were increased. For example, amplicon sequence variant (ASV) 362 
belonging to the genus Bacteroides and ASV 312 belonging to Tannerellaceae were 
enriched in no rejection (P < 0.001 and P < 0.01), whereas ASV 365 was enriched 
in patients with allograft rejection (P = 0.04). Looking at metagenomic 
functions, a higher abundance of genes coding for enzymes involved in bacterial 
multidrug resistance and processing of short-chain fatty acids was found in 
patients without rejection but an increase in enzymes involved in nicotinamide 
adenine dinucleotide phosphate production was seen in patients with allograft 
rejection.
CONCLUSIONS: A distinct microbial fingerprint of patients with allograft 
rejection might serve as noninvasive biomarker in the future.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Transplantation Direct. Published by Wolters 
Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/TXD.0000000000001582
PMCID: PMC10876239
PMID: 38380347

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Feb 18;22(1):175. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-04984-4.

Multi-omic profiling reveals associations between the gut microbiome, host 
genome and transcriptome in patients with colorectal cancer.

Zou S(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Yang C(#)(5), Zhang J(#)(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhong D(1)(2)(3)(4), 
Meng M(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhang L(5), Chen H(6), Fang L(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510655, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Colorectal and Pelvic Floor Disease, 
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510655, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Human Microbiome and Chronic Diseases (Sun Yat-sen 
University), Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, 510655, China.
(4)Biomedical Innovation Center, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510655, China.
(5)Department of Computer Science, Faculty of Science, Hong Kong Baptist 
University, Hong Kong, China.
(6)Gastrointestinal Endoscopy Center, The Eighth Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, 518033, China. chenhlei3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of General Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510655, China. fanglk3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(8)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Colorectal and Pelvic Floor Disease, 
The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510655, China. 
fanglk3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(9)Key Laboratory of Human Microbiome and Chronic Diseases (Sun Yat-sen 
University), Ministry of Education, Guangzhou, 510655, China. 
fanglk3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(10)Biomedical Innovation Center, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510655, China. fanglk3@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the leading cancer worldwide. Microbial 
agents have been considered to contribute to the pathogenesis of different 
disease. But the underlying relevance between CRC and microbiota remain unclear.
METHODS: We dissected the fecal microbiome structure and genomic and 
transcriptomic profiles of matched tumor and normal mucosa tissues from 41 CRC 
patients. Of which, the relationship between CRC-associated bacterial taxa and 
their significantly correlated somatic mutated gene was investigated by exome 
sequencing technology. Differentially expressed functional genes in CRC were 
clustered according to their correlation with differentially abundant species, 
following by annotation with DAVID. The composition of immune and stromal cell 
types was identified by XCELL.
RESULTS: We identified a set of 22 microbial gut species associated with CRC and 
estimate the relative abundance of KEGG ontology categories. Next, the 
interactions between CRC-related gut microbes and clinical phenotypes were 
evaluated. 4 significantly mutated gene: TP53, APC, KRAS, SMAD4 were pointed out 
and the associations with cancer related microbes were identified. Among them, 
Fusobacterium nucleatum positively corelated with different host metabolic 
pathways. Finally, we revealed that Fusobacterium nucleatum modified the tumor 
immune environment by TNFSF9 gene expression.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our multi-omics data could help identify novel 
biomarkers to inform clinical decision-making in the detection and diagnosis of 
CRC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-04984-4
PMCID: PMC10874565
PMID: 38369542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Sci Total Environ. 2024 Mar 25;918:170722. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.170722.  Epub 2024 Feb 6.

Genomic characterisation of bioaerosols within livestock facilities: A 
systematic review.

Farrell CT(1), Hunter E(2), Wilson PB(2), White SJ(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Science and Technology, Nottingham Trent University, UK.
(2)Medical Technologies Innovation Facility, Nottingham Trent University, UK.
(3)Medical Technologies Innovation Facility, Nottingham Trent University, UK. 
Electronic address: samuel.white@ntu.ac.uk.

Livestock facilities are widely regarded as reservoirs of infectious disease, 
owing to their abundance in particulate matter (PM) and microbial bioaerosols. 
Over the past decade, bioaerosol studies have increasingly utilised high 
throughput sequencing (HTS) to achieve superior throughput, taxonomic 
resolution, and the detection of unculturable organisms. However, the prevailing 
focus on amplicon sequencing has limited the identification of viruses and 
microbial taxa at the species-level. Herein, a literature search was conducted 
to identify methods capable of overcoming the aforementioned limitations. 
Screening 1531 international publications resulted in 29 eligible for review. 
Metagenomics capable of providing rich insights were identified in only three 
instances. Notably, long-read sequencing was not utilised for metagenomics. This 
review also identified that sample collection methods lack a uniform approach, 
highlighted by the differences in sampling equipment, flow rates and durations. 
Further heterogeneity was introduced by the unique sampling conditions, which 
makes it challenging to ground new findings within the established literature. 
For instance, winter was associated with increased microbial abundance and 
antimicrobial resistance, yet less alpha diversity. Researchers implementing 
metagenomics into the livestock environment should consider season, the 
microclimate, and livestock growth stage as influential upon their findings. 
Considering the increasing accessibility of long-read sequencing, future 
research should explore its viability within a novel uniform testing protocol 
for bioaerosol emissions.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2024.170722
PMID: 38331298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: SJW, CTF, EH, and PBW report 
financial support was provided by Fédération Équestre Internationale.

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Feb 3;15(1):1035. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-45336-6.

Gestational diabetes augments group B Streptococcus infection by disrupting 
maternal immunity and the vaginal microbiota.

Mercado-Evans V(1)(2), Mejia ME(1), Zulk JJ(1), Ottinger S(1), Hameed ZA(1), 
Serchejian C(1), Marunde MG(1), Robertson CM(1), Ballard MB(1), Ruano SH(3), 
Korotkova N(4)(5), Flores AR(6), Pennington KA(3), Patras KA(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(2)Medical Scientist Training Program, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
77030, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington, KY, USA.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, McGovern Medical 
School, UTHealth Houston, Children's Memorial Hermann Hospital, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. katy.patras@bcm.edu.
(8)Alkek Center for Metagenomics and Microbiome Research, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. katy.patras@bcm.edu.

Group B Streptococcus (GBS) is a pervasive perinatal pathogen, yet factors 
driving GBS dissemination in utero are poorly defined. Gestational diabetes 
mellitus (GDM), a complication marked by dysregulated immunity and maternal 
microbial dysbiosis, increases risk for GBS perinatal disease. Using a murine 
GDM model of GBS colonization and perinatal transmission, we find that GDM mice 
display greater GBS in utero dissemination and subsequently worse neonatal 
outcomes. Dual-RNA sequencing reveals differential GBS adaptation to the GDM 
reproductive tract, including a putative glycosyltransferase (yfhO), and altered 
host responses. GDM immune disruptions include reduced uterine natural killer 
cell activation, impaired recruitment to placentae, and altered maternofetal 
cytokines. Lastly, we observe distinct vaginal microbial taxa associated with 
GDM status and GBS invasive disease status. Here, we show a model of GBS 
dissemination in GDM hosts that recapitulates several clinical aspects and 
identifies multiple host and bacterial drivers of GBS perinatal disease.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-45336-6
PMCID: PMC10838280
PMID: 38310089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Feb 1;12(1):17. doi: 10.1186/s40168-023-01721-9.

Model-free prediction of microbiome compositions.

Asher EE(1), Bashan A(2).

Author information:
(1)Physics Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(2)Physics Department, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Israel. 
amir.bashan@biu.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: The recent recognition of the importance of the microbiome to the 
host's health and well-being has yielded efforts to develop therapies that aim 
to shift the microbiome from a disease-associated state to a healthier one. 
Direct manipulation techniques of the species' assemblage are currently 
available, e.g., using probiotics or narrow-spectrum antibiotics to introduce or 
eliminate specific taxa. However, predicting the species' abundances at the new 
state remains a challenge, mainly due to the difficulties of deciphering the 
delicate underlying network of ecological interactions or constructing a 
predictive model for such complex ecosystems.
RESULTS: Here, we propose a model-free method to predict the species' abundances 
at the new steady state based on their presence/absence configuration by 
utilizing a multi-dimensional k-nearest-neighbors (kNN) regression algorithm. By 
analyzing data from numeric simulations of ecological dynamics, we show that our 
predictions, which consider the presence/absence of all species holistically, 
outperform both the null model that uses the statistics of each species 
independently and a predictive neural network model. We analyze real metagenomic 
data of human-associated microbial communities and find that by relying on a 
small number of "neighboring" samples, i.e., samples with similar species 
assemblage, the kNN predicts the species abundance better than the whole-cohort 
average. By studying both real metagenomic and simulated data, we show that the 
predictability of our method is tightly related to the dissimilarity-overlap 
relationship of the training data.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate how model-free methods can prove useful in 
predicting microbial communities and may facilitate the development of 
microbial-based therapies. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-023-01721-9
PMCID: PMC10832217
PMID: 38303006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. mBio. 2024 Mar 13;15(3):e0334223. doi: 10.1128/mbio.03342-23. Epub 2024 Feb 1.

From wolves to humans: oral microbiome resistance to transfer across mammalian 
hosts.

Podar NA(1), Carrell AA(2), Cassidy KA(3), Klingeman DM(2), Yang Z(2), Stahler 
EA(3), Smith DW(3), Stahler DR(3), Podar M(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Engineering, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Biosciences Department, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, 
USA.
(3)Yellowstone Center for Resources, National Park Service, Yellowstone National 
Park, Wyoming, USA.

The mammalian mouth is colonized by complex microbial communities, adapted to 
specific niches, and in homeostasis with the host. Individual microbes interact 
metabolically and rely primarily on nutrients provided by the host, with which 
they have potentially co-evolved along the mammalian lineages. The oral 
environment is similar across mammals, but the diversity, specificity, and 
evolution of community structure in related or interacting mammals are little 
understood. Here, we compared the oral microbiomes of dogs with those of wild 
wolves and humans. In dogs, we found an increased microbial diversity relative 
to wolves, possibly related to the transition to omnivorous nutrition following 
domestication. This includes a larger diversity of Patescibacteria than 
previously reported in any other oral microbiota. The oral microbes are most 
distinct at bacterial species or strain levels, with few if any shared between 
humans and canids, while the close evolutionary relationship between wolves and 
dogs is reflected by numerous shared taxa. More taxa are shared at higher 
taxonomic levels including with humans, supporting their more ancestral common 
mammalian colonization followed by diversification. Phylogenies of selected oral 
bacterial lineages do not support stable human-dog microbial transfers but 
suggest diversification along mammalian lineages (apes and canids). Therefore, 
despite millennia of cohabitation and close interaction, the host and its native 
community controls and limits the assimilation of new microbes, even if closely 
related. Higher resolution metagenomic and microbial physiological studies, 
covering a larger mammalian diversity, should help understand how oral 
communities assemble, adapt, and interact with their hosts.IMPORTANCENumerous 
types of microbes colonize the mouth after birth and play important roles in 
maintaining oral health. When the microbiota-host homeostasis is perturbed, 
proliferation of some bacteria leads to diseases such as caries and 
periodontitis. Unlike the gut microbiome, the diversity of oral microbes across 
the mammalian evolutionary space is not understood. Our study compared the oral 
microbiomes of wild wolves, dogs, and apes (humans, chimpanzees, and bonobos), 
with the aim of identifying if microbes have been potentially exchanged between 
humans and dogs as a result of domestication and cohabitation. We found little 
if any evidence for such exchanges. The significance of our research is in 
finding that the oral microbiota and/or the host limit the acquisition of 
exogenous microbes, which is important in the context of natural exclusion of 
potential novel pathogens. We provide a framework for expanded higher-resolution 
studies across domestic and wild animals to understand resistance/resilience.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.03342-23
PMCID: PMC10936156
PMID: 38299854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Commun Biol. 2024 Jan 30;7(1):139. doi: 10.1038/s42003-024-05822-5.

A genome-wide association study reveals the relationship between human genetic 
variation and the nasal microbiome.

Liu X(#)(1)(2), Tong X(#)(1), Zou L(#)(1), Ju Y(#)(1)(2), Liu M(1), Han M(1), Lu 
H(3), Yang H(1)(4), Wang J(1)(4), Zong Y(1), Liu W(1), Xu X(1), Jin X(1), Xiao 
L(1)(5), Jia H(6)(7), Guo R(8), Zhang T(9).

Author information:
(1)BGI Research, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100049, China.
(3)China National Genebank, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518120, China.
(4)James D. Watson Institute of Genome Sciences, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(5)Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Detection and Intervention of Human 
Intestinal Microbiome, BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, 518083, China.
(6)Greater Bay Area Institute of Precision Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China. huijue_jia@fudan.edu.cn.
(7)School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
huijue_jia@fudan.edu.cn.
(8)BGI Research, Shenzhen, 518083, China. guoruijin@genomics.cn.
(9)BGI Research, Wuhan, 430074, China. tao.zhang@genomics.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The nasal cavity harbors diverse microbiota that contributes to human health and 
respiratory diseases. However, whether and to what extent the host genome shapes 
the nasal microbiome remains largely unknown. Here, by dissecting the human 
genome and nasal metagenome data from 1401 healthy individuals, we demonstrated 
that the top three host genetic principal components strongly correlated with 
the nasal microbiota diversity and composition. The genetic association analyses 
identified 63 genome-wide significant loci affecting the nasal microbial taxa 
and functions, of which 2 loci reached study-wide significance 
(p < 1.7 × 10-10): rs73268759 within CAMK2A associated with genus Actinomyces 
and family Actinomycetaceae; and rs35211877 near POM121L12 with Gemella 
asaccharolytica. In addition to respiratory-related diseases, the associated 
loci are mainly implicated in cardiometabolic or neuropsychiatric diseases. 
Functional analysis showed the associated genes were most significantly 
expressed in the nasal airway epithelium tissue and enriched in the calcium 
signaling and hippo signaling pathway. Further observational correlation and 
Mendelian randomization analyses consistently suggested the causal effects of 
Serratia grimesii and Yokenella regensburgei on cardiometabolic biomarkers 
(cystine, glutamic acid, and creatine). This study suggested that the host 
genome plays an important role in shaping the nasal microbiome.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-024-05822-5
PMCID: PMC10828421
PMID: 38291185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interest.

1. mBio. 2024 Feb 14;15(2):e0193523. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01935-23. Epub 2024 Jan
26.

Longitudinal profiling of the intestinal microbiome in children with cystic 
fibrosis treated with elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor.

Reasoner SA(#)(1), Bernard R(#)(2), Waalkes A(3), Penewit K(3), Lewis J(3), 
Sokolow AG(4), Brown RF(4), Edwards KM(5), Salipante SJ(3), Hadjifrangiskou 
M(1)(6)(7), Nicholson MR(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology, Division of Molecular 
Pathogenesis, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition, Monroe Carrell Junior Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Pulmonary 
Medicine, Monroe Carrell Junior Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt, Nashville, 
Tennessee, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Monroe Carrell 
Junior Children's Hospital at Vanderbilt, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(6)Center for Personalized Microbiology (CPMi), Vanderbilt University Medical 
Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(7)Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology and Inflammation, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Nov 21:2023.08.11.23293949. doi: 10.1101/2023.08.11.23293949.

The intestinal microbiome influences growth and disease progression in children 
with cystic fibrosis (CF). Elexacaftor-tezacaftor-ivacaftor (ELX/TEZ/IVA), the 
newest pharmaceutical modulator for CF, restores the function of the pathogenic 
mutated CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) channel. We performed a 
single-center longitudinal analysis of the effect of ELX/TEZ/IVA on the 
intestinal microbiome, intestinal inflammation, and clinical parameters in 
children with CF. Following ELX/TEZ/IVA, children with CF had significant 
improvements in body mass index and percent predicted forced expiratory volume 
in one second, and required fewer antibiotics for respiratory infections. 
Intestinal microbiome diversity increased following ELX/TEZ/IVA coupled with a 
decrease in the intestinal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus, the predominant 
respiratory pathogen in children with CF. There was a reduced abundance of 
microbiome-encoded antibiotic resistance genes. Microbial pathways for aerobic 
respiration were reduced after ELX/TEZ/IVA. The abundance of microbial acid 
tolerance genes was reduced, indicating microbial adaptation to increased CFTR 
function. In all, this study represents the first comprehensive analysis of the 
intestinal microbiome in children with CF receiving ELX/TEZ/IVA.IMPORTANCECystic 
fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disease with significant 
gastrointestinal symptoms in addition to pulmonary complications. Recently 
approved treatments for CF, CF transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) 
modulators, are anticipated to substantially improve the care of people with CF 
and extend their lifespans. Prior work has shown that the intestinal microbiome 
correlates with health outcomes in CF, particularly in children. Here, we study 
the intestinal microbiome of children with CF before and after the CFTR 
modulator, ELX/TEZ/IVA. We identify promising improvements in microbiome 
diversity, reduced measures of intestinal inflammation, and reduced antibiotic 
resistance genes. We present specific bacterial taxa and protein groups which 
change following ELX/TEZ/IVA. These results will inform future mechanistic 
studies to understand the microbial improvements associated with CFTR modulator 
treatment. This study demonstrates how the microbiome can change in response to 
a targeted medication that corrects a genetic disease.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01935-23
PMCID: PMC10865789
PMID: 38275294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jan 11;14:1280205. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1280205. 
eCollection 2023.

Gut microbiota analyses of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients undergoing 
narrowband ultraviolet B therapy reveal alterations associated with disease 
treatment.

Nguyen WQ(#)(1), Chrisman LP(#)(1), Enriquez GL(#)(2), Hooper MJ(1), Griffin 
TL(1), Ahmad M(2), Rahman S(2), Green SJ(3), Seed PC(4)(5), Guitart J(1), Burns 
MB(2), Zhou XA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Department of Biology, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(3)Genomics and Microbiome Core Facility, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, United States.
(4)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's 
Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Recent studies have shown a close relationship between cutaneous T-cell lymphoma 
(CTCL) and its microbiome. CTCL disease progression is associated with gut 
dysbiosis and alterations in bacterial taxa parallel those observed in 
immunologically similar atopic dermatitis. Moreover, the microbial profile of 
lesional skin may predict response to narrowband ultraviolet B (nbUVB), a common 
skin-directed therapy. However, the relationship between the gut microbiome, an 
immunologically vital niche, and nbUVB remains unexplored in CTCL. Herein, we 
performed 16S rRNA sequencing and PICRUSt2 predictive metagenomics on DNA 
extracted from stool swabs of 13 CTCL patients treated with nbUVB, 8 non-treated 
patients, and 13 healthy controls. Disease response was assessed with modified 
Severity Weighted Assessment Tool (mSWAT); of nbUVB-treated patients, 6 improved 
(decreased mSWAT), 2 remained stable, and 5 worsened (increased mSWAT). 
Protective commensal bacteria including Lactobacillaceae and 
Erysipelatoclostridiaceae were significantly less abundant in CTCL patients 
compared to controls. With treatment, the CTCL gut microbiome exhibited 
decreased phylogenetic diversity and lower relative abundance of 
pro-inflammatory Sutterellaceae. Sutterellaceae was also significantly more 
abundant in patients who worsened, and Eggerthellaceae and Erysipelotrichaceae 
trended higher in patients who improved. Finally, PICRUSt2 functional 
predictions based on shifts in abundance of bacterial sequences repeatedly 
identified alterations in inositol degradation, which plays a key role in host 
immunomodulation, including inositol phospholipid signaling relevant to T-cell 
survival and proliferation. Our results bolster the paradigm of gut dysbiosis in 
CTCL and its functional implications in disease pathogenesis, and further 
delineate bacterial taxa associated with nbUVB response and with nbUVB treatment 
itself.

Copyright © 2024 Nguyen, Chrisman, Enriquez, Hooper, Griffin, Ahmad, Rahman, 
Green, Seed, Guitart, Burns and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1280205
PMCID: PMC10808320
PMID: 38274799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Front Plant Sci. 2024 Jan 11;14:1282188. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1282188. 
eCollection 2023.

Metagenomic study reveals hidden relationships among fungal diversity, variation 
of plant disease, and genetic distance in Cornus florida (Cornaceae).

Pais A(1), Ristaino J(2)(3), Whetten R(4), Xiang QJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, North Carolina State University 
(NCSU), Raleigh, NC, United States.
(2)Department of Entomology & Plant Pathology, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC, United States.
(3)Emerging Plant Disease and Global Food Security Cluster, North Carolina State 
University, Raleigh, NC, United States.
(4)Department of Forestry and Environmental Resources, North Carolina State 
University (NCSU), Raleigh, NC, United States.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding patterns of plant-microbe interactions across plant 
species and populations is a critical yet poorly characterized aspect in the 
field of plant pathology. Microbial DNA sequences present as contaminants in 
omics data of plants obtained using next-generation sequencing methods provide a 
valuable source to explore the relationships among endophytic microbial 
diversity, disease and genetic differentiation of host plants, and environmental 
variation, but few such studies have been conducted. The flowering dogwood tree 
(Cornus florida L.), an ecologically important species in North America, is 
threatened by powdery mildew and dogwood anthracnose diseases, and knowledge of 
the microbial diversity harbored within genetically and environmental distinct 
populations of this species remains largely unknown.
METHODS: We conducted a metagenomics study utilizing the sequences of 
RAD-tag/genotype-by-sequence libraries from leaf tissues of C. florida to 
examine such host-fungus interactions across the dogwood's US range. We 
performed various combinations of alignments to both host and pathogen genomes 
to obtain filtered sets sequences for metagenomics analysis. Taxonomic 
assignments were determined on each filtered set of sequences, followed by 
estimation of microbial diversity and correlation to environment and 
host-genetic variation.
RESULTS: Our data showed that microbial community composition significantly 
differed between visually healthy and diseased sites. Several microbial taxa 
known to interact with dogwood were identified from these sequences. We found no 
correlation between microbial diversity and relative abundances of sequences 
aligning to draft genomes of either pathogen causing powdery mildew or dogwood 
anthracnose. We found a significant relationship between differences of fungal 
communities and geographic distances of plant populations, suggesting roles of 
environments in shaping fungal communities in leaf tissues. Significant 
correlations between the genetic differentiation of plant samples and fungal 
community dissimilarity (beta diversity) were also observed in certain sets of 
our analyses-suggesting the possibility of a relationship between microbial 
community composition and plant genetic distance. This relationship persisted in 
significance even after controlling for significant effects of 
geographic-bioclimatic variation of microbial diversity.
DISCUSSION: Our results suggest that both genetics and the environment play a 
significant role in shaping foliar fungal communities. Our findings underscore 
the power of leveraging hidden microbial sequences within datasets originally 
collected for plant genetic studies to understand plant-pathogen interactions.

Copyright © 2024 Pais, Ristaino, Whetten and Xiang.

DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2023.1282188
PMCID: PMC10809005
PMID: 38273942

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

1. Nature. 2024 Jan;625(7996):813-821. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06893-w. Epub 2024
 Jan 3.

Host genetic regulation of human gut microbial structural variation.

Zhernakova DV(#)(1), Wang D(#)(1)(2), Liu L(#)(3), Andreu-Sánchez S(1)(2), Zhang 
Y(1)(2), Ruiz-Moreno AJ(1)(2), Peng H(1), Plomp N(3)(4), Del Castillo-Izquierdo 
Á(1)(3), Gacesa R(1)(4), Lopera-Maya EA(1), Temba GS(5)(6)(7), Kullaya VI(6)(8), 
van Leeuwen SS(9); Lifelines Cohort Study; Xavier RJ(10)(11), de Mast Q(5)(7), 
Joosten LAB(5)(12), Riksen NP(5), Rutten JHW(5), Netea MG(5)(7)(13)(14), Sanna 
S(1)(15), Wijmenga C(1), Weersma RK(4), Zhernakova A(1), Harmsen HJM(16), Fu 
J(17)(18).

Collaborators: Aguirre-Gamboa R, Deelen P, Franke L, Kuivenhoven JA, Nolte IM, 
Sanna S, Snieder H, Swertz MA, Visscher PM, Vonk JM.

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Pediatrics, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(3)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Kilimanjaro 
Christian Medical University College, Moshi, Tanzania.
(7)Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Kilimanjaro Clinical Research Institute, Kilimanjaro Christian Medical 
Center, Moshi, Tanzania.
(9)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(10)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(11)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Department of Molecular 
Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Medical Genetics, Iuliu Haţieganu University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania.
(13)Department of Immunology and Metabolism, Life and Medical Sciences 
Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(14)Human Genomics Laboratory, Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 
Craiova, Romania.
(15)Institute for Genetic and Biomedical Research, National Research Council, 
Cagliari, Italy.
(16)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention, Groningen, The Netherlands. 
h.j.m.harmsen@umcg.nl.
(17)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Genetics, Groningen, The Netherlands. j.fu@umcg.nl.
(18)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Pediatrics, Groningen, The Netherlands. j.fu@umcg.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Although the impact of host genetics on gut microbial diversity and the 
abundance of specific taxa is well established1-6, little is known about how 
host genetics regulates the genetic diversity of gut microorganisms. Here we 
conducted a meta-analysis of associations between human genetic variation and 
gut microbial structural variation in 9,015 individuals from four Dutch cohorts. 
Strikingly, the presence rate of a structural variation segment in 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii that harbours an N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) 
utilization gene cluster is higher in individuals who secrete the type A 
oligosaccharide antigen terminating in GalNAc, a feature that is jointly 
determined by human ABO and FUT2 genotypes, and we could replicate this 
association in a Tanzanian cohort. In vitro experiments demonstrated that GalNAc 
can be used as the sole carbohydrate source for F. prausnitzii strains that 
carry the GalNAc-metabolizing pathway. Further in silico and in vitro studies 
demonstrated that other ABO-associated species can also utilize GalNAc, 
particularly Collinsella aerofaciens. The GalNAc utilization genes are also 
associated with the host's cardiometabolic health, particularly in individuals 
with mucosal A-antigen. Together, the findings of our study demonstrate that 
genetic associations across the human genome and bacterial metagenome can 
provide functional insights into the reciprocal host-microbiome relationship.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06893-w
PMCID: PMC10808065
PMID: 38172637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: H.J.M.H. in the past received a research grant 
from Chr. Hansen A.G., Denmark. R.K.W. acted as a consultant for Takeda, 
received unrestricted research grants from Takeda, Johnson & Johnson, Tramedico 
and Ferring, and received speaker fees from MSD, Abbvie and Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals. All other authors declare no competing interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Dec 14;14:1309709. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1309709. 
eCollection 2023.

Antibiotic resistance profiles of gut microbiota across various primate species 
in Guangxi.

Huang H(1), Pang X(2), Que T(3)(4)(5), Chen P(5), Li S(5), Wu A(5), He M(5), Qiu 
H(6), Hu Y(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Biological Specimen Bank, Discipline Construction Office, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(2)Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Center for Disease Prevention and Control, 
Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(3)Faculty of Data Science, City University of Macau, Macau SAR, China.
(4)Right River National Medical College, Baise, Guangxi, China.
(5)Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region Terrestrial Wildlife Course Research and 
Epidemic Diseases Monitor Center, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(6)Life Sciences Institute, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pre-Clinical 
Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(8)Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi key Laboratory for 
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 
China.

INTRODUCTION: Understanding the gut microbiota and antibiotic resistance gene 
(ARG) profiles in non-human primates (NHPs) is crucial for evaluating their 
potential impact on human health and the environment.
METHODS: In this study, we performed metagenomic analysis of 203 primate fecal 
samples, including nine NHP species and humans, to comprehensively characterize 
their gut microbiota and ARGs.
RESULTS: Our study reveals the prevailing phyla in primates as Firmicutes, 
Bacteroidetes, Euryarchaeota, and Proteobacteria. The captive NHPs exhibited 
higher ARG abundance compared to their wild counterparts, with tetracycline and 
beta-lactam resistance genes prevailing. Notably, ARG subtypes in Trachypithecus 
leucocephalus (T. leucocephalus) residing in karst limestone habitats displayed 
a more dispersed distribution compared to other species. Interestingly, ARG 
profiles of NHPs clustered based on geographic location and captivity status. 
Co-occurrence network analysis revealed intricate correlations between ARG 
subtypes and bacterial taxa. Procrustes analysis unveiled a significant 
correlation between ARGs and microbial phylogenetic community structure. 
Taxonomic composition analysis further highlighted differences in microbial 
abundance among NHPs and humans.
DISCUSSION: Our study underscores the impact of lifestyle and geographical 
location on NHP gut microbiota and ARGs, providing essential insights into the 
potential risks posed by NHPs to antibiotic resistance dissemination. This 
comprehensive analysis enhances our understanding of the interplay between NHPs 
and the gut resistome, offering a critical reference for future research on 
antibiotic resistance and host-microbe interactions.

Copyright © 2023 Huang, Pang, Que, Chen, Li, Wu, He, Qiu and Hu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1309709
PMCID: PMC10753005
PMID: 38156010

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Zool Res. 2024 Jan 18;45(1):95-107. doi: 10.24272/j.issn.2095-8137.2023.008.

Comprehensive analysis of the gut microbiome and post-translational 
modifications elucidates the route involved in microbiota-host interactions.

Wang HY(1)(2)(3), Liu LX(4), Chen XY(5), Zhang YD(6), Li WX(1), Li WW(5), Wang 
L(1), Mo XL(1)(6), Wei H(7), Ji P(2)(8), Xie P(1)(2)(9).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Diagnosis and Treatment on Brain Functional Diseases, 
First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, 
China.
(2)College of Stomatology and Affiliated Stomatological Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 401147, China.
(3)Chongqing Key Laboratory for Oral Diseases and Biomedical Sciences, Chongqing 
401147, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Yongchuan Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing 402160, China.
(5)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Basic Medicine, Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing 400016, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing 400016, China.
(7)Yu-Yue Pathology Scientific Research Center, Chongqing 401329, China. E-mail: 
Weihong63528@163.com.
(8)Chongqing Key Laboratory for Oral Diseases and Biomedical Sciences, Chongqing 
401147, China. E-mail: jiping@hospital.cqmu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing 400016, China. E-mail: xiepeng@cqmu.edu.cn.

The gut microbiome interacts with the host to maintain body homeostasis, with 
gut microbial dysbiosis implicated in many diseases. However, the underlying 
mechanisms of gut microbe regulation of host behavior and brain functions remain 
unclear. This study aimed to elucidate the influence of gut microbiota on brain 
functions via post-translational modification mechanisms in the presence or 
absence of bacteria without any stimulation. We conducted succinylome analysis 
of hippocampal proteins in germ-free (GF) and specific pathogen-free (SPF) mice 
and metagenomic analysis of feces from SPF mice. These results were integrated 
with previously reported hippocampal acetylome and phosphorylome data from the 
same batch of mice. Subsequent bioinformatics analyses revealed 584 
succinylation sites on 455 proteins, including 54 up-regulated succinylation 
sites on 91 proteins and 99 down-regulated sites on 51 proteins in the GF mice 
compared to the SPF mice. We constructed a panoramic map of gut 
microbiota-regulated succinylation, acetylation, and phosphorylation, and 
identified cross-talk and relative independence between the different types of 
post-translational modifications in modulating complicated intracellular 
pathways. Pearson correlation analysis indicated that 13 taxa, predominantly 
belonging to the Bacteroidetes phylum, were correlated with the biological 
functions of post-translational modifications. Positive correlations between 
these taxa and succinylation and negative correlations between these taxa and 
acetylation were identified in the modulation of intracellular pathways. This 
study highlights the hippocampal physiological changes induced by the absence of 
gut microbiota, and proteomic quantification of succinylation, phosphorylation, 
and acetylation, contributing to our understanding of the role of the gut 
microbiome in brain function and behavioral phenotypes.

Publisher: 
肠道微生物可与宿主相互作用维持机体稳态，疾病状态下肠道微生物会发生紊乱。然而，肠道微生物调控宿主脑功能和行为的机制仍不清楚。该研究旨在阐明正常小鼠和无菌小鼠在无任何刺激的情况下肠道菌群通过蛋白翻译后修饰对脑功能影响的作用机制。 
我们对GF和SPF小鼠的海马组织进行了琥珀酰化蛋白修饰组学检测，并对SPF小鼠的粪便进行了宏基因组分析。同时将这些结果与之前报告的同一批次的小鼠海马乙酰化和磷酸化蛋白组数据进行整合和生物信息学分析。研究发现，与SPF组相比，GF组鉴定到了455个蛋白的584个琥珀酰化位点，其中91个蛋白的54个琥珀酰化位点表达上调，51个蛋白的99个琥珀酰化位点表达下调。进一步构建了受肠道微生物调控的琥珀酰化、乙酰化和磷酸化的蛋白修饰全景图谱，并确定了不同类型的翻译后修饰在调节复杂细胞通路中的“串扰”现象及独立作用。Pearson相关性分析显示，13个拟杆菌门与蛋白翻译后修饰的生物学功能相关。在调节细胞内通路中，这些菌与琥珀酰化修饰水平呈正相关，与乙酰化修饰水平呈负相关。该研究报道了肠道菌群缺失引起的海马生理变化，并通过蛋白修饰组学分析了其海马琥珀酰化、磷酸化和乙酰化修饰变化，将有助于促进我们对肠道微生物调控宿主大脑功能及表型的机制理解。.

DOI: 10.24272/j.issn.2095-8137.2023.008
PMCID: PMC10839661
PMID: 38114436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Nature. 2024 Jan;625(7993):157-165. doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06838-3. Epub 2023
 Dec 13.

Bioactive glycans in a microbiome-directed food for children with malnutrition.

Hibberd MC(#)(1)(2)(3), Webber DM(#)(1)(2)(3), Rodionov DA(4), Henrissat 
S(1)(2)(5), Chen RY(1)(2), Zhou C(1)(2), Lynn HM(1)(2), Wang Y(1)(2), Chang 
HW(1)(2), Lee EM(1)(2), Lelwala-Guruge J(1)(2), Kazanov MD(6), Arzamasov AA(4), 
Leyn SA(4), Lombard V(5), Terrapon N(5), Henrissat B(7)(8), Castillo JJ(9), 
Couture G(9), Bacalzo NP Jr(9), Chen Y(1)(2)(9), Lebrilla CB(9), Mostafa I(10), 
Das S(10), Mahfuz M(10), Barratt MJ(1)(2)(3), Osterman AL(4), Ahmed T(10), 
Gordon JI(11)(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Edison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Center for Gut Microbiome and Nutrition Research, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Infectious and Inflammatory Disease Center, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical 
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Architecture et Fonction des Macromolécules Biologiques, CNRS, Aix-Marseille 
University, Marseille, France.
(6)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(7)Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine (DTU Bioengineering), Technical 
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(9)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA.
(10)International Centre for Diarrhoeal Disease Research, Bangladesh (icddr,b), 
Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(11)Edison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. jgordon@wustl.edu.
(12)Center for Gut Microbiome and Nutrition Research, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. jgordon@wustl.edu.
(13)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St Louis, MO, USA. jgordon@wustl.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Aug 18:2023.08.14.23293998. doi: 10.1101/2023.08.14.23293998.

Evidence is accumulating that perturbed postnatal development of the gut 
microbiome contributes to childhood malnutrition1-4. Here we analyse 
biospecimens from a randomized, controlled trial of a microbiome-directed 
complementary food (MDCF-2) that produced superior rates of weight gain compared 
with a calorically more dense conventional ready-to-use supplementary food in 
12-18-month-old Bangladeshi children with moderate acute malnutrition4. We 
reconstructed 1,000 bacterial genomes (metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs)) from 
the faecal microbiomes of trial participants, identified 75 MAGs of which the 
abundances were positively associated with ponderal growth (change in 
weight-for-length Z score (WLZ)), characterized changes in MAG gene expression 
as a function of treatment type and WLZ response, and quantified carbohydrate 
structures in MDCF-2 and faeces. The results reveal that two Prevotella copri 
MAGs that are positively associated with WLZ are the principal contributors to 
MDCF-2-induced expression of metabolic pathways involved in utilizing the 
component glycans of MDCF-2. The predicted specificities of carbohydrate-active 
enzymes expressed by their polysaccharide-utilization loci are correlated with 
(1) the in vitro growth of Bangladeshi P. copri strains, possessing varying 
degrees of polysaccharide-utilization loci and genomic conservation with these 
MAGs, in defined medium containing different purified glycans representative of 
those in MDCF-2, and (2) the levels of faecal carbohydrate structures in the 
trial participants. These associations suggest that identifying bioactive glycan 
structures in MDCFs metabolized by growth-associated bacterial taxa will help to 
guide recommendations about their use in children with acute malnutrition and 
enable the development of additional formulations.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-023-06838-3
PMCID: PMC10764277
PMID: 38093016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.L.O. and D.A.R. are co-founders of Phenobiome, 
a company pursuing development of computational tools for predictive phenotype 
profiling of microbial communities. C.B.L. is a co-founder of Infinant Health, 
interVenn Bio and BCD Bioscience—companies involved in the characterization of 
glycans and developing carbohydrate applications for human health. A joint 
patent application between Washington University in St Louis and icddr,b has 
been filed, entitled “Synbiotic combination of selected strains of P. copri and 
dietary glycans to treat malnutrition”, with J.I.G., M.C.H., D.M.W., H.-W.C., 
Y.W., M.J.B. and T.A. listed as co-inventors (PCT/US2023/018738). The authors 
are committed to the principle of Global Access; patented technologies will be 
made available and accessible at an affordable price to those in need throughout 
the world.

1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Nov 22;14:1264941. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1264941. 
eCollection 2023.

microBiomeGSM: the identification of taxonomic biomarkers from metagenomic data 
using grouping, scoring and modeling (G-S-M) approach.

Bakir-Gungor B(1), Temiz M(2), Jabeer A(1), Wu D(3)(4), Yousef M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Abdullah Gul 
University, Kayseri, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, 
Abdullah Gul University, Kayseri, Türkiye.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Division of Oral and Craniofacial Health Sciences, Adams School of Dentistry, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(5)Department of Information Systems, Zefat Academic College, Zefat, Israel.
(6)Galilee Digital Health Research Center (GDH), Zefat Academic College, Zefat, 
Israel.

Numerous biological environments have been characterized with the advent of 
metagenomic sequencing using next generation sequencing which lays out the 
relative abundance values of microbial taxa. Modeling the human microbiome using 
machine learning models has the potential to identify microbial biomarkers and 
aid in the diagnosis of a variety of diseases such as inflammatory bowel 
disease, diabetes, colorectal cancer, and many others. The goal of this study is 
to develop an effective classification model for the analysis of metagenomic 
datasets associated with different diseases. In this way, we aim to identify 
taxonomic biomarkers associated with these diseases and facilitate disease 
diagnosis. The microBiomeGSM tool presented in this work incorporates the 
pre-existing taxonomy information into a machine learning approach and 
challenges to solve the classification problem in metagenomics 
disease-associated datasets. Based on the G-S-M (Grouping-Scoring-Modeling) 
approach, species level information is used as features and classified by 
relating their taxonomic features at different levels, including genus, family, 
and order. Using four different disease associated metagenomics datasets, the 
performance of microBiomeGSM is comparatively evaluated with other feature 
selection methods such as Fast Correlation Based Filter (FCBF), Select K Best 
(SKB), Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGB), Conditional Mutual Information 
Maximization (CMIM), Maximum Likelihood and Minimum Redundancy (MRMR) and 
Information Gain (IG), also with other classifiers such as AdaBoost, Decision 
Tree, LogitBoost and Random Forest. microBiomeGSM achieved the highest results 
with an Area under the curve (AUC) value of 0.98% at the order taxonomic level 
for IBDMD dataset. Another significant output of microBiomeGSM is the list of 
taxonomic groups that are identified as important for the disease under study 
and the names of the species within these groups. The association between the 
detected species and the disease under investigation is confirmed by previous 
studies in the literature. The microBiomeGSM tool and other supplementary files 
are publicly available at: https://github.com/malikyousef/microBiomeGSM.

Copyright © 2023 Bakir-Gungor, Temiz, Jabeer, Wu and Yousef.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1264941
PMCID: PMC10703168
PMID: 38075911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Data Brief. 2023 Nov 10;51:109791. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2023.109791. eCollection
 2023 Dec.

Soil microbial functional gene dataset associated with Agathis australis.

Lawrence P(1), Padamsee M(2), Lee K(1), Lacap-Bugler DC(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Science, Faculty of Health and Environmental Science, Auckland 
University of Technology, Auckland 1010, New Zealand.
(2)Manaaki Whenua Landcare Research, 231 Morrin Road, Auckland 1072, New 
Zealand.

Agathis australis (New Zealand kauri) is a significant and iconic native tree of 
Aotearoa New Zealand. Currently, Phytophthora agathidicida that causes 
kauri-dieback disease is killing kauri trees. Only 1% of the New Zealand virgin 
kauri forest remains [1,2]. Recent studies revealed that many soil-borne 
microorganisms had been found to systemically boost the defensive capacity of 
the trees by providing competition to pathogens for nutrient intake, thus 
preventing pathogen colonization and modulating plant immunity [3,4]. In 
addition, the root microbiome consists of an entire complex 
rhizosphere-associated microbes with their genetic elements and interactions 
that have influenced plant health. To date, very few studies have been conducted 
to investigate the microorganisms in the kauri soil and possible environmental 
drivers. To characterize the functional gene profile in relation to soil 
microbial diversity of the kauri trees at Auckland Botanic Gardens (ABG), 
Auckland, New Zealand the GeoChip 5.0 M (Glomics Inc. USA), a microarray-based 
metagenomics tool, was used. GeoChip 5.0 M comprises of 162,000 probes from 
365,000 target genes (coding DNA sequence - CDS), which covers all taxonomic 
groups (archaea, bacteria, fungi, protists, algae, and viruses) [5]. The ABG has 
kauri trees that are approximately 20 years old, located in three distinct 
man-made environments: Native Forest, Kauri Grove, and Rose Garden. We selected 
two trees from the Native Forest and two from the Kauri Grove for our 
experiment. Soil samples were collected from the four cardinal points of each 
tree, at 10 cm depth. Pooled environmental DNA was sent to Glomics (USA) and the 
data were preprocessed using GeoChip data analysis pipeline described in 
http://www.ou.edu/ieg/tools/data-analysispipeline.html. Based on the GeoChip 
data generated from the soil samples, we have detected a total of 946 genes, 
4342 taxa, 102 phyla, and 995 genera. The data presented here provide an 
overview of functional genes associated with kauri soil, which can serve as 
baseline for other kauri soil microbiome analysis at forest-scale studies. The 
raw data has been uploaded to Mendeley Data 
https://doi.org/10.17632/T22NNN385K.1.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2023.109791
PMCID: PMC10694058
PMID: 38053586

1. Environ Microbiome. 2023 Dec 5;18(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s40793-023-00529-2.

Repeated exposure of wheat to the fungal root pathogen Bipolaris sorokiniana 
modulates rhizosphere microbiome assembly and disease suppressiveness.

Costa LSAS(1)(2), de Faria MR(1), Chiaramonte JB(1), Mendes LW(3), Sepo E(2), de 
Hollander M(2), Fernandes JMC(4), Carrión VJ(2)(5)(6)(7), Bettiol W(1), 
Mauchline TH(8), Raaijmakers JM(2)(5), Mendes R(9).

Author information:
(1)Embrapa Environment, Jaguariúna, Brazil.
(2)Department of Microbial Ecology, Netherlands Institute of Ecology 
(NIOO-KNAW), Wageningen, The Netherlands.
(3)Center for Nuclear Energy in Agriculture, University of São Paulo, 
Piracicaba, Brazil.
(4)Embrapa Wheat, Passo Fundo, Brazil.
(5)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(6)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, 
Málaga, Spain.
(7)Departamento de Microbiología y Protección de Cultivos, Instituto de 
Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea "La Mayora", Universidad de 
Málaga-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Málaga, Spain.
(8)Sustainable Soils and Crops, Rothamsted Research, Harpenden, UK.
(9)Embrapa Environment, Jaguariúna, Brazil. rodrigo.mendes@embrapa.br.

BACKGROUND: Disease suppressiveness of soils to fungal root pathogens is 
typically induced in the field by repeated infections of the host plant and 
concomitant changes in the taxonomic composition and functional traits of the 
rhizosphere microbiome. Here, we studied this remarkable phenomenon for 
Bipolaris sorokiniana in two wheat cultivars differing in resistance to this 
fungal root pathogen.
RESULTS: The results showed that repeated exposure of the susceptible wheat 
cultivar to the pathogen led to a significant reduction in disease severity 
after five successive growth cycles. Surprisingly, the resistant wheat cultivar, 
initially included as a control, showed the opposite pattern with an increase in 
disease severity after repeated pathogen exposure. Amplicon analyses revealed 
that the bacterial families Chitinophagaceae, Anaerolineaceae and 
Nitrosomonadaceae were associated with disease suppressiveness in the 
susceptible wheat cultivar; disease suppressiveness in the resistant wheat 
cultivar was also associated with Chitinophagaceae and a higher abundance of 
Comamonadaceae. Metagenome analysis led to the selection of 604 Biosynthetic 
Gene Clusters (BGCs), out of a total of 2,571 identified by AntiSMASH analysis, 
that were overrepresented when the soil entered the disease suppressive state. 
These BGCs are involved in the biosynthesis of terpenes, non-ribosomal peptides, 
polyketides, aryl polyenes and post-translationally modified peptides.
CONCLUSION: Combining taxonomic and functional profiling we identified key 
changes in the rhizosphere microbiome during disease suppression. This 
illustrates how the host plant relies on the rhizosphere microbiome as the first 
line of defense to fight soil-borne pathogens. Microbial taxa and functions 
identified here can be used in novel strategies to control soil-borne fungal 
pathogens.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40793-023-00529-2
PMCID: PMC10696838
PMID: 38053159

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Nov 22:2023.09.27.559801. doi: 
10.1101/2023.09.27.559801.

skDER: microbial genome dereplication approaches for comparative and metagenomic 
applications.

Salamzade R(1)(2), Kalan LR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine and 
Public Health, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.
(2)Microbiology Doctoral Training Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, WI, USA.
(3)M.G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, David Braley Centre 
for Antibiotic Discovery, Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

skDER (https://github.com/raufs/skDER) combines recent advances to efficiently 
estimate average nucleotide identity (ANI) between thousands of microbial 
genomes by skani1 with two low-memory methods for genomic dereplication. The 
first method implements a dynamic algorithm to determine a concise set of 
representative genomes. This approach is well-suited for selecting reference 
genomes to align metagenomic reads onto for tracking strain presence across 
related microbiome samples. This is because fewer representative genomes should 
alleviate the concern that reads belonging to the same strain get falsely 
partitioned across closely related genomes. The other method, which uses a 
greedy approach, is better suited for use in comparative genomics, where users 
might be overwhelmed with the high number of genomes available for certain taxa 
and aim to reduce redundancy and, therefore, computational requirements for 
downstream analytics. This method selects a larger number of representative 
genomes to comprehensively sample the pangenome space for the taxon of interest. 
To further aid usage for comparative genomics studies, skDER also features an 
option to automatically download genomes classified as a particular species or 
genus in the Genome Taxonomy Database2-4 and we provide precomputed 
representative genomes for commonly studied bacterial taxa5.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.09.27.559801
PMCID: PMC10690176
PMID: 38045253

1. Microbiome. 2023 Nov 25;11(1):263. doi: 10.1186/s40168-023-01703-x.

Multi-site microbiota alteration is a hallmark of kidney stone formation.

Al KF(1)(2), Joris BR(3), Daisley BA(4), Chmiel JA(1)(2), Bjazevic J(5), Reid 
G(1)(2)(5), Gloor GB(3), Denstedt JD(5), Razvi H(5), Burton JP(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Human Microbiome and Probiotic Research, Lawson Health Research 
Institute, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, ON, 
Canada.
(4)Molecular and Cellular Biology Department, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, 
Canada.
(5)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, The University of Western 
Ontario, London, ON, Canada.
(6)Centre for Human Microbiome and Probiotic Research, Lawson Health Research 
Institute, London, ON, Canada. Jeremy.burton@lawsonresearch.com.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, ON, Canada. Jeremy.burton@lawsonresearch.com.
(8)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, The University of Western 
Ontario, London, ON, Canada. Jeremy.burton@lawsonresearch.com.

BACKGROUND: Inquiry of microbiota involvement in kidney stone disease (KSD) has 
largely focussed on potential oxalate handling abilities by gut bacteria and the 
increased association with antibiotic exposure. By systematically comparing the 
gut, urinary, and oral microbiota of 83 stone formers (SF) and 30 healthy 
controls (HC), we provide a unified assessment of the bacterial contribution to 
KSD.
RESULTS: Amplicon and shotgun metagenomic sequencing approaches were consistent 
in identifying multi-site microbiota disturbances in SF relative to HC. 
Biomarker taxa, reduced taxonomic and functional diversity, functional 
replacement of core bioenergetic pathways with virulence-associated gene 
markers, and community network collapse defined SF, but differences between 
cohorts did not extend to oxalate metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that multi-site microbiota alteration is a hallmark of 
SF, and KSD treatment should consider microbial functional restoration and the 
avoidance of aberrant modulators such as poor diet and antibiotics where 
applicable to prevent stone recurrence. Video Abstract.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-023-01703-x
PMCID: PMC10675928
PMID: 38007438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. PeerJ. 2023 Nov 3;11:e16394. doi: 10.7717/peerj.16394. eCollection 2023.

Comparative analysis of shotgun metagenomics and 16S rDNA sequencing of gut 
microbiota in migratory seagulls.

Liao F(#)(1)(2), Xia Y(#)(3), Gu W(4), Fu X(4), Yuan B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The First People's Hospital of Yunnan 
Province, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(2)The Affiliated Hospital of Kunming University of Science and Technology, 
Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases and Hepatology, The First People's Hospital 
of Yunnan Province, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(4)Department of Acute Infectious Diseases Control and Prevention, Yunnan 
Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, Kunming, Yunnan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Shotgun metagenomic and 16S rDNA sequencing are commonly used 
methods to identify the taxonomic composition of microbial communities. 
Previously, we analysed the gut microbiota and intestinal pathogenic bacteria 
configuration of migratory seagulls by using 16S rDNA sequencing and culture 
methods.
METHODS: To continue in-depth research on the gut microbiome and reveal the 
applicability of the two methods, we compared the metagenome and 16S rDNA 
amplicon results to further demonstrate the features of this animal.
RESULTS: The number of bacterial species detected by metagenomics gradually 
increased from the phylum to species level, consistent with 16S rDNA sequencing. 
Several taxa were commonly shared by both sequencing methods. However, 
Escherichia, Shigella, Erwinia, Klebsiella, Salmonella, Escherichia albertii, 
Shigella sonnei, Salmonella enterica, and Shigella flexneri were unique taxa for 
the metagenome compared with Escherichia-Shigella, Hafnia-Obesumbacterium, 
Catellicoccus marimammalium, Lactococcus garvieae, and Streptococcus 
gallolyticus for 16S rDNA sequencing. The largest differences in relative 
abundance between the two methods were identified at the species level, which 
identified many pathogenic bacteria to humans using metagenomic sequencing. 
Pearson correlation analysis indicated that the correlation coefficient for the 
two methods gradually decreased with the refinement of the taxonomic levels. The 
high consistency of the correlation coefficient was identified at the genus 
level for the beta diversity of the two methods.
CONCLUSIONS: In general, relatively consistent patterns and reliability could be 
identified by both sequencing methods, but the results varied following the 
refinement of taxonomic levels. Metagenomic sequencing was more suitable for the 
discovery and detection of pathogenic bacteria of gut microbiota in seagulls. 
Although there were large differences in the numbers and abundance of bacterial 
species of the two methods in terms of taxonomic levels, the patterns and 
reliability results of the samples were consistent.

© 2023 Liao et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.16394
PMCID: PMC10629391
PMID: 37941936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Lancet Planet Health. 2023 Nov;7(11):e888-e899. doi: 
10.1016/S2542-5196(23)00213-9.

Association of health, nutrition, and socioeconomic variables with global 
antimicrobial resistance: a modelling study.

Njage PMK(1), van Bunnik B(2), Munk P(3), Marques ARP(4), Aarestrup FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Roslin Institute, College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(3)Research Group for Genomic Epidemiology, Technical University of Denmark, 
Lyngby, Denmark. Electronic address: panj@food.dtu.dk.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases and Public Health, Jockey Club College of 
Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
Special Administrative Region, China.

BACKGROUND: Although antimicrobial use is a key selector for antimicrobial 
resistance, recent studies have suggested that the ecological context in which 
antimicrobials are used might provide important factors for the prediction of 
the emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance.
METHODS: We used 1547 variables from the World Bank dataset consisting of 
socioeconomic, developmental, health, and nutritional indicators; data from a 
global sewage-based study on antimicrobial resistance (abundance of 
antimicrobial resistance genes [ARGs]); and data on antimicrobial usage computed 
from the ECDC database and the IQVIA database. We characterised and built models 
predicting the global resistome at an antimicrobial class level. We used a 
generalised linear mixed-effects model to estimate the association between 
antimicrobial usage and ARG abundance in the sewage samples; a multivariate 
random forest model to build predictive models for each antimicrobial resistance 
class and to select the most important variables for ARG abundance; logistic 
regression models to test the association between the predicted country-level 
antimicrobial resistance abundance and the country-level proportion of clinical 
resistant bacterial isolates; finite mixture models to investigate geographical 
heterogeneities in the abundance of ARGs; and multivariate finite mixture models 
with covariates to investigate the effect of heterogeneity in the association 
between the most important variables and the observed ARG abundance across the 
different country subgroups. We compared our predictions with available clinical 
phenotypic data from the SENTRY Antimicrobial Surveillance Program from eight 
antimicrobial classes and 12 genera from 56 countries.
FINDINGS: Using antimicrobial use data from between Jan 1, 2016, and Dec 31, 
2019, we found that antimicrobial usage was not significantly associated with 
the global ARG abundance in sewage (p=0·72; incidence rate ratio 1·02 [95% CI 
0·92-1·13]), whereas country-specific World Bank's variables explained a large 
amount of variation. The importance of the World Bank variables differed between 
antimicrobial classes and countries. Generally, the estimated global ARG 
abundance was positively associated with the prevalence of clinical phenotypic 
resistance, with a strong association for bacterial groups in the human gut. The 
associations between bacterial groups and ARG abundance were positive and 
significantly different from zero for the aminoglycosides (three of the four of 
the taxa tested), β-lactam (all the six microbial groups), fluoroquinolones 
(seven of nine of the microbial groups), glycopeptide (one microbial group 
tested), folate pathway antagonists (four of five microbial groups), and 
tetracycline (two of nine microbial groups).
INTERPRETATION: Metagenomic analysis of sewage is a robust approach for the 
surveillance of antimicrobial resistance in pathogens, especially for bacterial 
groups associated with the human gut. Additional studies on the associations 
between important socioeconomic, nutritional, and health factors and 
antimicrobial resistance should consider the variation in these associations 
between countries and antimicrobial classes.
FUNDING: EU Horizon 2020 and Novo Nordisk Foundation.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2542-5196(23)00213-9
PMID: 37940209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests All authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2023 Oct 3:rs.3.rs-3376801. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-3376801/v1.

Integrative analysis of microbial 16S gene and shotgun metagenomic sequencing 
data improves statistical efficiency.

Yue Y(1), Read TD(2), Fedirko V(3)(4), Satten GA(5), Hu YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GA, 30322, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.
(5)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA.

BACKGROUND: The most widely used technologies for profiling microbial 
communities are 16S marker-gene sequencing and shotgun metagenomic sequencing. 
Interestingly, many microbiome studies have performed both sequencing 
experiments on the same cohort of samples. The two sequencing datasets often 
reveal consistent patterns of microbial signatures, highlighting the potential 
for an integrative analysis to improve power of testing these signatures. 
However, differential experimental biases, partially overlapping samples, and 
differential library sizes pose tremendous challenges when combining the two 
datasets. Currently, researchers either discard one dataset entirely or use 
different datasets for different objectives.
METHODS: In this article, we introduce the first method of this kind, named 
Com-2seq, that combines the two sequencing datasets for testing differential 
abundance at the genus and community levels while overcoming these difficulties. 
The new method is based on our LOCOM model (Hu et al., 2022), which employs 
logistic regression for testing taxon differential abundance while remaining 
robust to experimental bias. To benchmark the performance of Com-2seq, we 
introduce two ad hoc approaches: applying LOCOM to pooled taxa count data and 
combining LOCOM p-values from analyzing each dataset separately.
RESULTS: Our simulation studies indicate that Com-2seq substantially improves 
statistical efficiency over analysis of either dataset alone and works better 
than the two ad hoc approaches. An application of Com-2seq to two real 
microbiome studies uncovered scientifically plausible findings that would have 
been missed by analyzing individual datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: Com-2seq performs integrative analysis of 16S and metagenomic 
sequencing data, which improves statistical efficiency and has the potential to 
accelerate the search of microbial communities and taxa that are involved in 
human health and diseases.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3376801/v1
PMCID: PMC10602108
PMID: 37886529

Conflict of interest statement: Additional Declarations: No competing interests 
reported. Competing interests The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Sep 29;14:1267152. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1267152. 
eCollection 2023.

Metagenomic survey reveals global distribution and evolution of microbial sialic 
acid catabolism.

Li Y(1), Fan Y(1), Ma X(2), Wang Y(1), Liu J(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(2)Qingdao Municipal Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Qingdao, China.

Sialic acids comprise a varied group of nine-carbon amino sugars found mostly in 
humans and other higher metazoans, playing major roles in cell interactions with 
external environments as well as other cells. Microbial sialic acid catabolism 
(SAC) has long been considered a virulence determinant, and appears to be mainly 
the purview of pathogenic and commensal bacterial species associated with 
eukaryotic hosts. Here, we used 2,521 (pre-)assembled metagenomes to evaluate 
the distribution of SAC in microbial communities from diverse ecosystems and 
human body parts. Our results demonstrated that microorganisms possessing SAC 
globally existed in non-host associated environments, although much less 
frequently than in mammal hosts. We also showed that the ecological significance 
and taxonomic diversity of microbial SAC have so far been largely 
underestimated. Phylogenetic analysis revealed a strong signal of horizontal 
gene transfer among distinct taxa and habitats, and also suggested a specific 
ecological pressure and a relatively independent evolution history in 
environmental communities. Our study expanded the known diversity of microbial 
SAC, and has provided the backbone for further studies on its ecological roles 
and potential pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2023 Li, Fan, Ma, Wang and Liu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1267152
PMCID: PMC10570557
PMID: 37840734

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.