1. Nat Commun. 2024 Nov 27;15(1):10291. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-54797-8.

Multi-biome analysis identifies distinct gut microbial signatures and their 
crosstalk in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.

Akiyama S(1), Nishijima S(#)(2), Kojima Y(3), Kimura M(4), Ohsugi M(5), Ueki 
K(6), Mizokami M(7), Hattori M(8), Tsuchiya K(1), Uemura N(9), Kawai T(10), Bork 
P(11), Nagata N(#)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. nishijima.suguru@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Research Strategic Planning Center for Clinical 
Sciences, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center Hospital, 
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Diabetes Research Center, Research Institute, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Genome Medical Sciences Project, Research Institute, National Center for 
Global Health and Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Laboratory for Microbiome Sciences, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Kohnodai Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(10)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, 
Tokyo, Japan. nnagata_ncgm@yahoo.co.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

The integrative multi-kingdom interaction of the gut microbiome in ulcerative 
colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) remains underinvestigated. Here, we 
perform shotgun metagenomic sequencing of feces from patients with UC and CD, 
and healthy controls in the Japanese 4D cohort, profiling bacterial taxa, gene 
functions, and antibacterial genes, bacteriophages, and fungi. External 
metagenomic datasets from the US, Spain, the Netherlands, and China were 
analyzed to validate our multi-biome findings. We found that Enterococcus 
faecium and Bifidobacterium spp. were enriched in both diseases. Enriched 
Escherichia coli was characteristic of CD and was linked to numerous antibiotic 
resistance genes involved in efflux pumps and adherent-invasive Escherichia coli 
virulence factors. Virome changes correlated with shifts in the bacteriome, 
including increased abundances of phages encoding pathogenic genes. 
Saccharomyces paradoxus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were enriched in UC and CD, 
respectively. Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli had negative 
associations with short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria in CD. 
Multi-biome signatures and their interactions in UC and CD showed high 
similarities between Japan and other countries. Since bacteria, phages, and 
fungi formed multiple hubs of intra- or trans-kingdom networks with SCFA 
producers and pathobionts in UC and CD, an approach targeting the interaction 
network may hold therapeutic promise.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-54797-8
PMCID: PMC11603027
PMID: 39604394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. J Ginseng Res. 2024 Nov;48(6):581-591. doi: 10.1016/j.jgr.2024.08.001. Epub
2024  Aug 9.

Korean Red Ginseng alleviates dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis through gut 
microbiota modulation in mice.

Jeong JS(1), Baek GH(2), Kim JW(1), Kim JH(1), Chung EH(1), Ko JW(1), Kwon 
MJ(3), Kim SK(3), Lee SH(3), Kim JS(2)(4), Kim TW(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 FOUR Program), Chungnam National 
University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Nano-Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)R&D Headquarters, Korea Ginseng Corporation, Gwacheon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Institute for New Drug Development, College of Life Science and 
Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: There is a growing interest in understanding the association between 
the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such 
as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their 
ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on 
gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration 
in an experimental colitis model.
METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, 
the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological 
effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity 
index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the 
fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals 
in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted.
RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as 
indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and 
inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed 
that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and 
suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 
protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, 
was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal 
linings.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis 
by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, 
thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to 
elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of 
KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

© 2024 The Korean Society of Ginseng. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgr.2024.08.001
PMCID: PMC11584195
PMID: 39583173

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no known 
competing conflict of interest.

1. NPJ Genom Med. 2024 Oct 29;9(1):52. doi: 10.1038/s41525-024-00440-w.

Gut microbial and human genetic signatures of inflammatory bowel disease 
increase risk of comorbid mental disorders.

Lee J(#)(1)(2), Oh SJ(#)(3), Ha E(1)(2), Shin GY(3), Kim HJ(3), Kim K(4)(5), Lee 
CK(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(4)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
kkim@khu.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. kkim@khu.ac.kr.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. changkyun.lee@khu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

The high prevalence of comorbid mental disorders (CMDs) in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is well-documented. This study delves into the 
intricate CMD-IBD relationship through comprehensive analyses using human 
variants, gut microbiome, and anxiety/depression estimates from a cohort of 507 
IBD patients and 75 controls. Notably, patients with IBD, especially those with 
CMD, exhibited lower diversity than controls. We identified 106 differentially 
abundant taxa (DATs) in IBD patients compared to controls and 21 DATs 
distinguishing CMD-affected from CMD-free IBD patients. Microbial IBD-risk 
scores, reflecting an individual's microbial burden for IBD, revealed a 
significant enrichment of IBD-risk signatures in CMD-affected patients compared 
to CMD-free patients. Additionally, there was an IBD-risk variant potentially 
regulating the abundance of an IBD/CMD-associated DAT, suggesting an interplay 
between IBD-risk variants and dysbiosis in CMD. Our investigation underscores 
the pivotal role of IBD-associated gut dysbiosis in predisposing IBD patients to 
CMD, partially through genetic variant-mediated mechanisms.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41525-024-00440-w
PMCID: PMC11522461
PMID: 39472439

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Sep 30;12(10):1977. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12101977.

Bifidogenic Effect of Human Milk Oligosaccharides on Pediatric IBD Fecal 
Microbiota.

Otaru N(1), Bajic D(1), Van den Abbeele P(2), Vande Velde S(3), Van Biervliet 
S(3), Steinert RE(1), Rehman A(1).

Author information:
(1)Health, Nutrition & Care (HNC), DSM-Firmenich, 4303 Kaiseraugst, Switzerland.
(2)Cryptobiotix SA, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 82, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Ghent University Hospital, Corneel 
Heymanslaan 10, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

The prevalence of pediatric inflammatory bowel disease (pIBD) has been 
increasing over the last two decades. Yet, treatment strategies are still 
limited, in part due to the multifactorial nature of the disease and the complex 
interplay between genetic, environmental, dietary, immune, and gut microbial 
factors in its etiology. With their direct and indirect anti-inflammatory 
properties, human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) are a promising treatment and 
management strategy for IBD. However, to date there are no insights into how 
HMOs may affect pIBD microbiota. Here, we compared the effects of 
2'fucosyllactose (2'FL), difucosyllactose (DFL), 3'sialyllactose (3'SL), and 
blends thereof with fructooligosaccharide (FOS) on microbiota functionality 
(short- and branched-chain fatty acids, pH, and gas production) and composition 
(quantitative shallow shotgun sequencing) using fecal material from eight 
different pediatric Crohn's disease patients inoculated in the SIFR® technology. 
In general, all HMO treatments significantly increased total short-chain fatty 
acid production when compared with FOS, despite equal gas production. We found 
that 2'FL, either alone or in combination with DFL and 3'SL, exhibited a strong 
acetogenic and propiogenic effect, and 3'SL an acetogenic effect that surpassed 
the effects observed with FOS. No differences in overall community diversity 
between HMO- and FOS-treated pIBD microbiota were observed. There was, however, 
a stronger bifidogenic effect of 2'FL, 3'SL, 2'FL/DFL, and 2'FL/DFL + 3'SL when 
compared with FOS. In general, 3'SL and HMO blends enriched a broader species 
profile, including taxa with potentially anti-inflammatory properties, such as 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Blautia species. This study suggests HMOs as a 
promising strategy to beneficially alter the gut microbial profile in pIBD.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12101977
PMCID: PMC11509818
PMID: 39458287

Conflict of interest statement: N.O., D.B., R.E.S., and A.R. are employees of 
DSM-Firmenich. While the authors participated in the design of the study, the 
interpretation of the data, and the writing of the manuscript, they did not 
participate in the collection and analysis of data. P.V.d.A. is an employee of 
Cryptobiotix that received funding from DSM-Firmenich to perform this research.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Oct 17:izae199. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izae199. Online ahead
 of print.

Gut Microbial Signatures in Pediatric Crohn's Disease Vary According to Disease 
Activity Measures and Are Influenced by Proxies of Gastrointestinal Transit 
Time: An ImageKids Study.

Nichols B(1), Russell RK(2), Short B(1), Papadopoulou R(1), Focht G(3), Ijaz 
UZ(4), Walters TD(5), Sladek M(6), Hansen R(7), Mack DR(8)(9), Wine E(10), 
Griffiths AM(5), Turner D(3), Gerasimidis K(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, University of 
Glasgow, New Lister Building, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 2ER, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Royal Hospital for Children and 
Young People, 50 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
(3)Juliet Keidan Institute of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(4)James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Cracow, Poland.
(7)Division of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(8)CHEO Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centre, Division of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON K1H 
8L1, Canada.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated relationships between disease activity measures 
and the gut microbiome in children with Crohn's disease (CD) and how these were 
confounded by gastrointestinal transit time.
METHODS: Microbiome was profiled (16S rRNA sequencing) in feces from 196 
children with CD. Sixty participants also provided samples after 18 months. 
Mural inflammation (Pediatric Inflammatory Crohn's Magnetic Resonance 
Enterography Index, PICMI), the simple endoscopic score for CD, and the weighted 
pediatric Crohn's disease activity index (wPCDAI) were assessed. Fecal 
calprotectin, plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), and fecal water content (FWC), a 
proxy of gastrointestinal transit time, were measured too.
RESULTS: Microbiome α diversity, clustering, and differential taxa were related 
to disease status, but varied remarkably by disease activity measure used. The 
strongest relationships between microbiome and disease activity status were 
observed using wPCDAI; fewer or no relationships were seen using more objective 
measures like PICMI. Taxa predictive of disease activity status were dependent 
on the disease activity measure used with negligible overlap. Active disease was 
associated with more pathobionts (eg, Viellonella, Enterobacterales) and fewer 
fiber-fermenting organisms. The effect FWC had on microbiome superseded the 
effect of active disease for all disease activity measures, particularly with 
wPCDAI. Accounting for FWC, the differences in microbial signatures explained by 
disease activity status were attenuated or lost.
CONCLUSIONS: In CD, microbiome signatures fluctuate depending on the measure 
used to assess disease severity; several of these signals might be secondary 
disease effects linked with changes in gut motility in active disease. PICMI 
appears to be less influenced when studying relationships between microbiome and 
mural inflammation in CD.

Plain Language Summary: Microbiome signatures are related to Crohn’s disease 
status but vary remarkably by disease activity measure used. The effect gut 
transit time has on microbiome supersedes and confounds the effect of active 
disease, particularly with the use of less objective disease activity measures.

© 2024 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izae199
PMID: 39419819

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 10;14(1):23701. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6.

Dysbiotic signatures and diagnostic potential of gut microbial markers for 
inflammatory bowel disease in Korean population.

Kim HS(#)(1), Oh SJ(#)(2), Kim BK(#)(3), Kim JE(2), Kim BH(4)(5), Park YK(3), 
Yang BG(3), Lee JY(6), Bae JW(7)(8)(9), Lee CK(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Research Institute, GI Biome Inc., Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Kyung Hee University 
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)East-West Medical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. gidrlee@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Fecal samples were collected from 640 individuals in Korea, including 523 
patients with IBD (223 with Crohn's disease [CD] and 300 with ulcerative colitis 
[UC]) and 117 healthy controls. The samples were subjected to cross-sectional 
gut metagenomic analysis using 16 S rRNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. 
Patients with IBD, particularly those with CD, exhibited significantly lower 
alpha diversities than the healthy subjects. Differential abundance analysis 
revealed dysbiotic signatures, characterized by an expansion of the genus 
Escherichia-Shigella in patients with CD. Functional annotations showed that 
functional pathways related to bacterial pathogenesis and production of hydrogen 
sulfide (H2S) were strongly upregulated in patients with CD. A dysbiosis score, 
calculated based on functional characteristics, highly correlated with disease 
severity. Markers distinguishing between healthy subjects and patients with IBD 
showed accurate classification based on a small number of microbial taxa, which 
may be used to diagnose ambiguous cases. These findings confirm the taxonomic 
and functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in patients with IBD, especially 
those with CD. Taxa indicative of dysbiosis may have significant implications 
for future clinical research on the management and diagnosis of IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6
PMCID: PMC11467411
PMID: 39390011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Sep 30;12(1):186. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01897-8.

Stratification of human gut microbiomes by succinotype is associated with 
inflammatory bowel disease status.

Anthamatten L(1)(2), von Bieberstein PR(1), Menzi C(1), Zünd JN(2), Lacroix 
C(2), de Wouters T(3), Leventhal GE(4).

Author information:
(1)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Food Biotechnology, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, 
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland. t.dewouters@pharmabiome.com.
(4)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland. g.leventhal@pharmabiome.com.

BACKGROUND: The human gut microbiome produces and consumes a variety of 
compounds that interact with the host and impact health. Succinate is of 
particular interest as it intersects with both host and microbiome metabolism. 
However, which gut bacteria are most responsible for the consumption of 
intestinal succinate is poorly understood.
RESULTS: We build upon an enrichment-based whole fecal sample culturing approach 
and identify two main bacterial taxa that are responsible for succinate 
consumption in the human intestinal microbiome, Phascolarctobacterium and 
Dialister. These two taxa have the hallmark of a functional guild and are 
strongly mutual exclusive across 21,459 fecal samples in 94 cohorts and can thus 
be used to assign a robust "succinotype" to an individual. We show that they 
differ with respect to their rate of succinate consumption in vitro and that 
this is associated with higher concentrations of fecal succinate. Finally, 
individuals suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more likely to 
have the Dialister succinotype compared to healthy subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified that only two bacterial genera are the key succinate 
consumers in human gut microbiome, despite the fact that many more intestinal 
bacteria encode for the succinate pathway. This highlights the importance of 
phenotypic assays in functionally profiling intestinal microbiota. A 
stratification based on "succinotype" is to our knowledge the first 
function-based classification of human intestinal microbiota. The association of 
succinotype with IBD thus builds a bridge between microbiome function and IBD 
pathophysiology related to succinate homeostasis. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01897-8
PMCID: PMC11441152
PMID: 39350289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.A., P.R.v.B., C.M., T.d.W., and G.E.L. are or 
were employees of PharmaBiome. T.d.W. and C.L. are founders of PharmaBiome. L.A. 
is a co-founder of PharmaBiome. L.A., P.R.v.B., T.d.W., and G.E.L. are inventors 
on the patent application WO 2022/023458 A1 entitled “Microbial Niche Mapping” 
and on the patent application WO 2023/118460 A1 entitled “New biomarker for 
disorders and diseases associated with intestinal dysbiosis”. PharmaBiome 
provided financial support.

1. mSystems. 2024 Oct 22;9(10):e0130323. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01303-23. Epub
2024  Sep 6.

Unfolding and de-confounding: biologically meaningful causal inference from 
longitudinal multi-omic networks using METALICA.

Ruiz-Perez D(1), Gimon I(1), Sazal M(1), Mathee K(2)(3), Narasimhan G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Bioinformatics Research Group (BioRG), Florida International University, 
Miami, Florida, USA.
(2)Florida International University, Miami, Florida, USA.
(3)Biomolecular Sciences Institute, Florida International University, Miami, 
Florida, USA.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Dec 13:2023.12.12.571384. doi: 10.1101/2023.12.12.571384.

A key challenge in the analysis of microbiome data is the integration of 
multi-omic datasets and the discovery of interactions between microbial taxa, 
their expressed genes, and the metabolites they consume and/or produce. In an 
effort to improve the state of the art in inferring biologically meaningful 
multi-omic interactions, we sought to address some of the most fundamental 
issues in causal inference from longitudinal multi-omics microbiome data sets. 
We developed METALICA, a suite of tools and techniques that can infer 
interactions between microbiome entities. METALICA introduces novel unrolling 
and de-confounding techniques used to uncover multi-omic entities that are 
believed to act as confounders for some of the relationships that may be 
inferred using standard causal inferencing tools. The results lend support to 
predictions about biological models and processes by which microbial taxa 
interact with each other in a microbiome. The unrolling process helps identify 
putative intermediaries (genes and/or metabolites) to explain the interactions 
between microbes; the de-confounding process identifies putative common causes 
that may lead to spurious relationships to be inferred. METALICA was applied to 
the networks inferred by existing causal discovery, and network inference 
algorithms were applied to a multi-omics data set resulting from a longitudinal 
study of IBD microbiomes. The most significant unrollings and de-confoundings 
were manually validated using the existing literature and databases.
IMPORTANCE: We have developed a suite of tools and techniques capable of 
inferring interactions between microbiome entities. METALICA introduces novel 
techniques called unrolling and de-confounding that are employed to uncover 
multi-omic entities considered to be confounders for some of the relationships 
that may be inferred using standard causal inferencing tools. To evaluate our 
method, we conducted tests on the inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) dataset from 
the iHMP longitudinal study, which we pre-processed in accordance with our 
previous work. From this dataset, we generated various subsets, encompassing 
different combinations of metagenomics, metabolomics, and metatranscriptomics 
datasets. Using these multi-omics datasets, we demonstrate how the unrolling 
process aids in the identification of putative intermediaries (genes and/or 
metabolites) to explain the interactions between microbes. Additionally, the 
de-confounding process identifies potential common causes that may give rise to 
spurious relationships to be inferred. The most significant unrollings and 
de-confoundings were manually validated using the existing literature and 
databases.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01303-23
PMCID: PMC11494969
PMID: 39240096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2387857. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2387857. 
Epub 2024 Aug 22.

Proteolytic bacteria expansion during colitis amplifies inflammation through 
cleavage of the external domain of PAR2.

Rondeau LE(1), Da Luz BB(1), Santiago A(1), Bermudez-Brito M(1), Hann A(1), De 
Palma G(1), Jury J(1), Wang X(1), Verdu EF(1), Galipeau HJ(1), Rolland C(2), 
Deraison C(2), Ruf W(3)(4), Bercik P(1), Vergnolle N(2), Caminero A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(2)IRSD, Université de Toulouse, INSERM, INRA, ENVT, UPS, Toulouse, France.
(3)Center for Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Johannes Gutenberg University Medical 
Center, Mainz, Germany.
(4)Department of Immunology and Microbiology, The Scripps Research Institute, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.

Imbalances in proteolytic activity have been linked to the development of 
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) and experimental colitis. Proteases in the 
intestine play important roles in maintaining homeostasis, but exposure of 
mucosal tissues to excess proteolytic activity can promote pathology through 
protease-activated receptors (PARs). Previous research implicates microbial 
proteases in IBD, but the underlying pathways and specific interactions between 
microbes and PARs remain unclear. In this study, we investigated the role of 
microbial proteolytic activation of the external domain of PAR2 in intestinal 
injury using mice expressing PAR2 with a mutated N-terminal external domain that 
is resistant to canonical activation by proteolytic cleavage. Our findings 
demonstrate the key role of proteolytic cleavage of the PAR2 external domain in 
promoting intestinal permeability and inflammation during colitis. In wild-type 
mice expressing protease-sensitive PAR2, excessive inflammation leads to the 
expansion of bacterial taxa that cleave the external domain of PAR2, 
exacerbating colitis severity. In contrast, mice expressing mutated 
protease-resistant PAR2 exhibit attenuated colitis severity and do not 
experience the same proteolytic bacterial expansion. Colonization of wild-type 
mice with proteolytic PAR2-activating Enterococcus and Staphylococcus worsens 
colitis severity. Our study identifies a previously unknown interaction between 
proteolytic bacterial communities, which are shaped by inflammation, and the 
external domain of PAR2 in colitis. The findings should encourage new 
therapeutic developments for IBD by targeting excessive PAR2 cleavage by 
bacterial proteases.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2387857
PMCID: PMC11346554
PMID: 39171684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2024 Aug 10:jjae125. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjae125. Online 
ahead of print.

Specific bacterial co-abundance groups are associated with inflammatory status 
in patients with ulcerative colitis.

Jangi S(1), Zhao N(2), Hsia K(1), Park YS(3), Michaud DS(2), Yoon H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Tufts University School of Medicine, Public Health and Community Medicine, 
Boston, MA United States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seongnam, South Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: While there is increasing interest in microbiome-directed 
therapies for patients with ulcerative colitis (UC), the identification of 
microbial targets remains elusive, underlining the need for novel approaches.
METHODS: Utilizing metagenomic data from the Study of a Prospective Adult 
Research Cohort with Inflammatory Bowel Disease, available via the IBD Plexus 
Program of the Crohn's & Colitis Foundation, we used a tree-based dichotomous 
approach to assemble distinct clusters of species-level bacterial co-abundance 
groups (CAGs). We evaluated the abundance of bacterial CAGs and fungal taxa 
during remission (n=166) and activity (n=46). We examined if the bacterial CAGs 
identified in our cohorts were conserved in 2 healthy cohorts and in a Korean UC 
cohort.
RESULTS: CAG3 and CAG8, dominated by bacteria from family Lachnospiraceae, were 
associated with remission. Low CAG8 and elevated Candida genus were predictive 
of active UC. Constituents from CAG8 were influential hub species of the 
remission-associated microbial UC network, including Ruminococcus gnavus, 
Erysipelatoclostridium ramosum, Blautia and Dorea species. These hub species 
interactions were preserved in 2 healthy cohorts and were partially 
recapitulated in a Korean UC cohort. CAG8 abundance correlated with the 
secondary bile acid production pathway. Bacterial CAGs did not correlate with 
Candida, however Bifidobacterium adolescentis and Alistipes putredinis were 
negatively associated with Candida.
CONCLUSIONS: Lachnospiriceae-dominated bacterial CAGs were associated with 
remission in UC, with key bacterial interactions within the CAG also observed in 
2 healthy cohorts and a Korean UC cohort. Bacterial CAG-based analyses may help 
to inform the design of candidate consortia for microbiome-based therapeutics.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjae125
PMID: 39126385

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Aug 6;14(1):18188. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-68619-w.

Higher alpha diversity and Lactobacillus blooms are associated with better 
engraftment after fecal microbiota transplant in inflammatory bowel disease.

Zhang YJ(1)(2)(3), Bousvaros A(1)(3), Docktor M(1)(4), Kaplan AL(1)(4), Rufo 
PA(1)(4), Leier M(1)(4), Weatherly M(1)(4), Zimmerman L(1)(4), Nguyen LTT(2)(3), 
Barton B(1), Russell G(5), Alm EJ(2)(3), Kahn SA(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology/Nutrition, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave., 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
21 Ames St., Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)IBD Center, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Gastroenterology/Nutrition, Maine Medical Center, 22 Bramhall St., Portland, 
ME, USA.
(6)Gastroenterology/Nutrition, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave., 
Boston, MA, USA. stacy.kahn@childrens.harvard.edu.
(7)IBD Center, Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA, USA. 
stacy.kahn@childrens.harvard.edu.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 Feb 01:2023.01.30.23285033. doi: 10.1101/2023.01.30.23285033.

Fecal Microbiota Transplant (FMT) has shown some success in treating 
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). There is emerging evidence that host 
engraftment of donor taxa is a tenet of successful FMT. We undertook a 
double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study to characterize the 
response to FMT in children and young adults with mild to moderate active 
Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Subjects with CD or UC were 
randomized to receive antibiotics and weekly FMT or placebo in addition to 
baseline medications. We enrolled 15 subjects aged 14-29 years. Four subjects 
had CD, and 11 had UC. Subjects exhibited a wide range of microbial diversity 
and donor engraftment. Specifically, engraftment ranged from 26 to 90% at week 2 
and 3-92% at 2 months. Consistent with the current literature, increases over 
time of both alpha diversity (p < 0.05) and donor engraftment (p < 0.05) 
correlated with improved clinical response. We discovered that the 
post-antibiotic but pre-FMT time point was rich in microbial correlates of 
eventual engraftment. Greater residual alpha diversity after antibiotic 
treatment was positively correlated with engraftment and subsequent clinical 
response. Interestingly, a transient rise in the relative abundance of 
Lactobacillus was also positively correlated with engraftment, a finding that we 
recapitulated with our analysis of another FMT trial.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-68619-w
PMCID: PMC11303812
PMID: 39107366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AB receives research support as a 
subinvestigator on protocols for Janssen, Abbvie, Takeda, Buhlmann, Arena, Eli 
Lilly, Bristol Myers Squibb, PROCISE diagnostics. AB receives consulting revenue 
from Takeda, Best Doctors, Eli Lilly, and Fresenius Kabi. AB received an 
honorarium from Boston University and Royalties from Up To Date. No other 
authors had any competing interests.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Jun 21;12(7):1260. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12071260.

Deciphering Microbial Composition in Patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease: 
Implications for Therapeutic Response to Biologic Agents.

Palmieri O(1), Bossa F(1), Castellana S(2), Latiano T(1), Carparelli S(1), 
Martino G(1), Mangoni M(2)(3), Corritore G(1), Nardella M(1), Guerra M(1), 
Biscaglia G(1), Perri F(1), Mazza T(2), Latiano A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Endoscopy, Fondazione IRCCS "Casa Sollievo 
della Sofferenza", 71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(2)Unit of Bioinformatics, Fondazione IRCCS "Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza", 
71013 San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 00161 Rome, 
Italy.

Growing evidence suggests that alterations in the gut microbiome impact the 
development of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), including Crohn's disease 
(CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Although IBD often requires the use of 
immunosuppressant drugs and biologic therapies to facilitate clinical remission 
and mucosal healing, some patients do not benefit from these drugs, and the 
reasons for this remain poorly understood. Despite advancements, there is still 
a need to develop biomarkers to help predict prognosis and guide treatment 
decisions. The aim of this study was to investigate the gut microbiome of IBD 
patients using biologics to identify microbial signatures associated with 
responses, following standard accepted criteria. Microbiomes in 66 stool samples 
from 39 IBD patients, comprising 20 CD and 19 UC patients starting biologic 
therapies, and 29 samples from healthy controls (HCs) were prospectively 
analyzed via NGS and an ensemble of metagenomics analysis tools. At baseline, 
differences were observed in alpha and beta metrics among patients with CD, UC 
and HC, as well as between the CD and UC groups. The degree of dysbiosis was 
more pronounced in CD patients, and those with dysbiosis exhibited a limited 
response to biological drugs. Pairwise differential abundance analyses revealed 
an increasing trend in the abundance of an unannotated genus from the 
Clostridiales order, Gemmiger genus and an unannotated genus from the 
Rikenellaceae family, which were consistently identified in greater abundance in 
HC. The Clostridium genus was more abundant in CD patients. At baseline, a 
greater abundance of the Odoribacter and Ruminococcus genera was found in IBD 
patients who responded to biologics at 14 weeks, whereas a genus identified as 
SMB53 was more enriched at 52 weeks. The Collinsella genus showed a higher 
prevalence among non-responder IBD patients. Additionally, a greater abundance 
of an unclassified genus from the Barnesiellaceae family and one from 
Lachnospiraceae was observed in IBD patients responding to Vedolizumab at 14 
weeks. Our analyses showed global microbial diversity, mainly in CD. This 
indicated the absence or depletion of key taxa responsible for producing 
short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs). We also identified an abundance of pathobiont 
microbes in IBD patients at baseline, particularly in non-responders to biologic 
therapies. Furthermore, specific bacteria-producing SCFAs were abundant in 
patients responding to biologics and in those responding to Vedolizumab.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12071260
PMCID: PMC11278628
PMID: 39065032

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Jul 19;24(1):268. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03425-y.

Adolescent gut microbiome imbalance and its association with immune response in 
inflammatory bowel diseases and obesity.

Joo M(1), Nam S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Gachon Advanced Institute for 
Health Sciences and Technology (GAIHST), Gachon University, Incheon, 21999, 
Korea.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Gachon Advanced Institute for 
Health Sciences and Technology (GAIHST), Gachon University, Incheon, 21999, 
Korea. nams@gachon.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Genome Medicine and Science, AI Convergence Center for Medical 
Science, Gachon Institute of Genome Medicine and Science, Gachon University Gil 
Medical Center, Gachon University College of Medicine, Dokjeom-Ro 3Beon-Gil, 
38-13, Namdong-Gu, Incheon, 21565, Republic of Korea. nams@gachon.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Recently, there has been an increase in the number of studies 
focusing on the association between the gut microbiome and obesity or 
inflammatory diseases, especially in adults. However, there is a lack of studies 
investigating the association between gut microbiome and gastrointestinal (GI) 
diseases in adolescents.
METHOD: We obtained 16S rRNA-seq datasets for gut microbiome analysis from 202 
adolescents, comprising ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease (CD), obesity 
(Ob), and healthy controls (HC). We utilized Quantitative Insights Into 
Microbial Ecology (QIIME) and Phylogenetic Investigation of Communities by 
Reconstruction of Unobserved States (PICRUSt) to acquire Operational Taxonomic 
Units (OTUs). Subsequently, we analyzed Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
(KEGG) Orthology (KO) terms and pathway enrichment for the identified OTUs.
RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the difference between the gut 
microbiomes in adolescents with GI diseases and those in healthy adolescents 
using 202 samples of 16S rRNA sequencing data. The distribution of the six main 
gut microbiota (i.e., unclassified Dorea, unclassified Lachnospiraceae, 
unclassified Ruminococcus, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Prevotella copri, 
unclassified Sutterella) was different based on the status of obesity and 
inflammatory diseases. Dysbiosis was observed within Lachnospiraceae in 
adolescents with inflammatory diseases (i.e., UC and CD), and in adolescents 
with obesity within Prevotella and Sutterella. More specifically, our results 
showed that the relative abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and 
unclassified Lachnospiraceae was more than 10% and 8% higher, respectively, in 
the UC group compared to the CD, Ob, and HC groups. Additionally, the Ob group 
had over 20% and over 3% higher levels of Prevotella copri and unclassified 
Sutterella, respectively, compared to the UC, CD, and HC groups. Also, 
inspecting associations between the six specific microbiota and KO terms, we 
found that the six microbiota -relating KO terms were associated with NOD-like 
receptor signaling. These six taxa differences may affect the immune system and 
inflammatory response by affecting NOD-like receptor signaling in the host 
during critical adolescence.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we discovered that dysbiosis of the microbial 
community had varying degrees of influence on the inflammatory and immune 
response pathways in adolescents with inflammatory diseases and obesity.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03425-y
PMCID: PMC11264842
PMID: 39030520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Jul 9:izae124. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izae124. Online ahead
of  print.

Treatment of Active Crohn's Disease With Exclusive Enteral Nutrition Diminishes 
the Immunostimulatory Potential of Fecal Microbial Products.

Kerbiriou C(1), Dickson C(1), Nichols B(1), Logan M(1), Mascellani A(2), Havlik 
J(2), Russell RK(3), Hansen R(4)(5), Milling S(6), Gerasimidis K(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Nursing, Glasgow Royal 
Infirmary, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Food Science, Czech University of Life Sciences Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Royal 
Hospital for Sick Children and Young People, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Royal 
Hospital for Children, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(5)Division of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Department of Child Health, 
School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.
(6)School of Infection and Immunity, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) is an effective treatment for 
active Crohn's disease (CD). This study explored the immunostimulatory potential 
of a cell-free fecal filtrate and related this with changes in the fecal 
microbiota and metabolites in children with active CD undertaking treatment with 
EEN.
METHODS: Production of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) from peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells was measured following their stimulation with cell-free fecal 
slurries from children with CD, before, during, and at completion of EEN. The 
metabolomic profile of the feces used was quantified using proton nuclear 
magnetic resonance and their microbiota composition with 16S ribosomal RNA 
sequencing.
RESULTS: Following treatment with EEN, 8 (72%) of 11 patients demonstrated a 
reduction in fecal calprotectin (FC) >50% and were subsequently labeled FC 
responders. In this subgroup, TNFα production from peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells was reduced during EEN (P = .008) and reached levels like healthy control 
subjects. In parallel to these changes, the fecal concentrations of acetate, 
butyrate, propionate, choline, and uracil significantly decreased in FC 
responders, and p-cresol significantly increased. At EEN completion, TNFα 
production from peripheral blood mononuclear cells was positively correlated 
with butyrate (rho = 0.70; P = .016). Microbiota structure (β diversity) was 
influenced by EEN treatment, and a total of 28 microbial taxa changed 
significantly in fecal calprotectin responders. At EEN completion, TNFα 
production positively correlated with the abundance of fiber fermenters from 
Lachnospiraceae_UCG-004 and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and negatively with 
Hungatella and Eisenbergiella tayi.
CONCLUSIONS: This study offers proof-of concept data to suggest that the 
efficacy of EEN may result from modulation of diet-dependent microbes and their 
products that cause inflammation in patients with CD.

Plain Language Summary: Treatment of active Crohn’s disease with exclusive 
enteral nutrition diminishes the proinflammatory potential of fecal microbial 
components, hence suggesting a mechanism of action involving modulation of 
diet-dependent microbes and their products that cause gut inflammation.

© 2024 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izae124
PMID: 38982655

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Apr 18;22(1):369. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05122-w.

Short-chain fatty acid-producing bacterial strains attenuate experimental 
ulcerative colitis by promoting M2 macrophage polarization via JAK/STAT3/FOXO3 
axis inactivation.

Zhao H(#)(1)(2)(3), Zhou Y(#)(1), Xu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Wang H(1), Zhao C(1), 
Huang H(1), Yang J(4), Huang C(1), Li Y(1), Wang L(5), Nie Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou First People's 
Hospital, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, South China 
University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The Second 
Clinical Medical College, Jinan University; The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Southern University of Science and Technology), Shenzhen, 518020, China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital, Jinan University, Guangzhou, 510630, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou, 
510180, China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The Second 
Clinical Medical College, Jinan University; The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Southern University of Science and Technology), Shenzhen, 518020, China. 
wanglsszrmyy@163.com.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou First People's 
Hospital, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, South China 
University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China. eynieyuqiang@scut.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Patients with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), dysbiosis, and 
immunosuppression who receive fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) from 
healthy donors are at an increased risk of developing bacteremia. This study 
investigates the efficacy of a mixture of seven short-chain fatty acid 
(SCFA)-producing bacterial strains (7-mix), the resulting culture supernatant 
mixture (mix-sup), and FMT for treating experimental ulcerative colitis (UC) and 
evaluates underlying mechanisms.
METHODS: Utilizing culturomics, we isolated and cultured SCFA-producing bacteria 
from the stool of healthy donors. We used a mouse model of acute UC induced by 
dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) to assess the effects of 7-mix, mix-sup, and FMT on 
intestinal inflammation and barrier function, microbial abundance and diversity, 
and gut macrophage polarization by flow cytometry, immunohistochemistry, 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing, and transwell assays.
RESULTS: The abundance of several SCFA-producing bacterial taxa decreased in 
patients with UC. Seven-mix and mix-sup suppressed the inflammatory response and 
enhanced intestinal mucosal barrier function in the mouse model of UC to an 
extent similar to or superior to that of FMT. Moreover, 7-mix and mix-sup 
increased the abundance of SCFA-producing bacteria and SCFA concentrations in 
colitic mice. The effects of these interventions on the inflammatory response 
and gut barrier function were mediated by JAK/STAT3/FOXO3 axis inactivation in 
macrophages by inducing M2 macrophage polarization in vivo and in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our approach provides new opportunities to rationally harness live 
gut probiotic strains and metabolites to reduce intestinal inflammation, restore 
gut microbial composition, and expedite the development of safe and effective 
treatments for IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-05122-w
PMCID: PMC11025230
PMID: 38637862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.

1. Nutrients. 2024 Apr 2;16(7):1033. doi: 10.3390/nu16071033.

Pre-Diagnosis Diet Predicts Response to Exclusive Enteral Nutrition and 
Correlates with Microbiome in Pediatric Crohn Disease.

Dijk S(1), Jarman M(2), Zhang Z(3)(4), Lawley M(5), Ahmad M(5), Suarez R(5), 
Rossi L(6), Chen M(7), Wu J(7), Carroll MW(5), Otley A(8), Sherlock M(9), Mack 
DR(10), Jacobson K(11), deBruyn JC(12), El-Matary W(13), Deslandres C(14), 
Rashid M(8), Church PC(15), Walters TD(15), Huynh HQ(5), Surette MG(6)(16), 
Griffiths AM(15), Wine E(1)(5); Canadian Children IBD Network.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 1C9, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Agriculture, Life, & Environmental Science, University of 
Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(4)College of Food and Biological Engineering, Jimei University, Xiamen 361000, 
China.
(5)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(6)Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(7)Nutrition Services (Child Health), Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, AB T5J 
3E4, Canada.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology & Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, NS B3H 4R2, Canada.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(10)CHEO IBD Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON 
K1N 6N5, Canada.
(11)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, B.C. Children's 
Hospital, British Columbia Children's Hospital Research Institute, Vancouver, BC 
V5Z 4H4, Canada.
(12)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(13)Section of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, Max Rady College of Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB 
R3T 2N2, Canada.
(14)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, CHU Sainte-Justine Hospital, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC 
H3T 1J4, Canada.
(15)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, IBD Center, Hospital for Sick 
Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1C6, Canada.
(16)Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.

Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) is effective in inducing remission in 
pediatric Crohn disease (CD). EEN alters the intestinal microbiome, but precise 
mechanisms are unknown. We hypothesized that pre-diagnosis diet establishes a 
baseline gut microbiome, which then mediates response to EEN. We analyzed 
prospectively recorded food frequency questionnaires (FFQs) for pre-diagnosis 
dietary patterns. Fecal microbiota were sequenced (16SrRNA) at baseline and 
through an 18-month follow-up period. Dietary patterns, Mediterranean diet 
adherence, and stool microbiota were associated with EEN treatment outcomes, 
disease flare, need for anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α therapy, and 
long-term clinical outcomes. Ninety-eight patients were included. Baseline 
disease severity and microbiota were associated with diet. Four dietary patterns 
were identified by FFQs; a "mature diet" high in fruits, vegetables, and fish 
was linked to increased baseline microbial diversity, which was associated with 
fewer disease flares (p < 0.05) and a trend towards a delayed need for anti-TNF 
therapy (p = 0.086). Baseline stool microbial taxa were increased (Blautia and 
Faecalibacterium) or decreased (Ruminococcus gnavus group) with the mature diet 
compared to other diets. Surprisingly, a "pre-packaged" dietary pattern (rich in 
processed foods) was associated with delayed flares in males (p < 0.05). 
Long-term pre-diagnosis diet was associated with outcomes of EEN therapy in 
pediatric CD; diet-microbiota and microbiota-outcome associations may mediate 
this relationship.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16071033
PMCID: PMC11013084
PMID: 38613066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.D., M.J., Z.Z., M.L., M.A., R.S., L.R., M.C., 
J.W., M.W.C., M.R., and M.G.S. have no conflicts to report. A.O. has served on 
an advisory board for AbbVie, Janssen, Pfizer, and Eli-Lilly; has received 
investigator-initiated research support from AbbVie; and has received 
educational grants from AbbVie and Janssen. M.S. has served as an advisory board 
member for AbbVie and is a speaker for Janssen and AbbVie. D.R.M. is a 
co-founder and shareholder of MedBiome Inc. K.J. has served as an advisory board 
member for AbbVie, Janssen, Amgen, Merck, Viatris, and McKesson Canada; is a 
member of AbbVie and Janssen Speaker’s bureau; and has received 
investigator-initiated research support from Janssen. J.C.d.B. served as an 
advisory board member and speaker for Abbvie, as well as an advisory board 
member for Janssen, Amgen, and Mylan. W.E.-M. served as an advisory board member 
and speaker’s panel member for AbbVie. C.D. served as an advisory board member 
and speaker for AbbVie, Organon, and Janssen. P.C.C. has received consulting 
fees from AbbVie, Janssen, Ferring, and Merck; honoraria from Abbvie and Amgen; 
investigator-initiated research support from AbbVie and Janssen; and educational 
grants from Janssen, Amgen, Takeda, and Viatris. Thomas D. Walters has received 
grants from AbbVie, Ferring; honoraria from AbbVie and Pfizer; and served as an 
advisory board member for AbbVie, Janssen, and Pfizer. H.Q.H. served as an 
advisory board member and speaker for AbbVie. A.M.G. reports consulting fees 
from AbbVie, Amgen, BristolMyersSquibb, Janssen, Lilly, Merck, and Pfizer; 
speaker fees from AbbVie, Janssen, and Nestle; and investigator-initiated 
research support from AbbVie. E.W. reports personal fees from AbbVie, Janssen, 
Nestle Health Sciences, BioJamp, Pfizer, and Mead Johnson Nutrition. The funders 
had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analysis, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Mar 27;15:1343891. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1343891. 
eCollection 2024.

Lacticaseibacillusparacasei BNCC345679 revolutionizes DSS-induced colitis and 
modulates gut microbiota.

Ahmad W(#)(1), Din AU(#)(1)(2), Khan TM(1), Rehman MU(3), Hassan A(4), Aziz 
T(5), Alharbi M(6), Wu J(1)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Basic Medicine Research Innovation Centre for Cardiometabolic Diseases, 
Ministry of Education, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.
(2)Plants for Human Health Institute, Department of Food, Bioprocessing and 
Nutrition Sciences, North Carolina State University, Kannapolis, NC, United 
States.
(3)Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Laboratory of Nano/Micro Composite Materials and Devices, Chongqing 
University of Science and Technology, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Agriculture, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)Key Laboratory of Medical Electrophysiology, Ministry of Education, Institute 
of Cardiovascular Research of Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.
(8)Laboratory for Cardiovascular Pharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, 
School of Pharmacy, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The gut microbiota plays an important role in the disease progression of 
inflammatory bowel disease. Although probiotics are effective against IBD, not 
many studies have investigated their effects on gut microbiota composition and 
immunomodulation in mouse colitis models. Our study aimed at the therapeutic 
effects of Lacticaseibacillus paracasei BNCC345679 for the first time and 
explored its impact on gut microbiome dysbiosis, inflammatory cytokines, related 
miRNAs, VCAM-1, oxidative stress, intestinal integrity, and mucus barrier. We 
found that oral intervention of L. paracasei BNCC345679 affects recovering 
beneficial microbial taxa, including lactobacillus spp. and akkermansia spp., 
followed by improved body weight, DAI score, and inflammatory cytokines. L. 
paracasei BNCC345679 mitigated oxidative stress and increased the expression of 
intestinal integrity proteins MUC2 and ZO-1. These results suggested that L. 
paracasei BNCC345679 has the capacity to reduce DSS-induced colitis and has the 
potential as a supplement for the mitigation of IBD.

Copyright © 2024 Ahmad, Din, Khan, Rehman, Hassan, Aziz, Alharbi and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1343891
PMCID: PMC11004379
PMID: 38601942

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2337269. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2337269. 
Epub 2024 Apr 9.

Cognitive behavioral and mindfulness with daily exercise intervention is 
associated with changes in intestinal microbial taxa and systemic inflammation 
in patients with Crohn's disease.

K I(1)(2), Y M(3), A N(1)(2), D S(4), G G(5), R S(6), D G(6), V SN(5), O S(5), M 
F(7), S R(5), S O(8), J MG(3), A M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Genetics, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 
Israel.
(2)The National Institute of Biotechnology in the Negev, School of Brain 
Sciences and Cognition, and Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research Center, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(3)MAGICAL Group, Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public 
Health, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beer-Sheva, Israel.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Soroka Medical Center, and 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, 
Israel.
(5)Spitzer Department of Social Work, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer 
Sheva, Israel.
(6)Department of Health Policy and Management, School of Public Health, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and Community Health Sciences, 
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease associated with 
psychological distress and intestinal microbial changes. Here, we examined 
whether a 3-month period of Cognitive Behavioral and Mindfulness with Daily 
Exercise (COBMINDEX) intervention, which improves the wellbeing and inflammatory 
state of CD patients, may also affect their gut microbiome. Gut microbiota, 
circulating inflammatory markers and hormones were analyzed in 24 CD patients 
before (T1) and after 3 months of COBMINDEX (T2), and in 25 age- and sex-matched 
wait-list control patients at the corresponding time-points. Microbiota analysis 
examined relative taxonomical abundance, alpha and beta diversity, and 
microbiome correlations with inflammatory and psychological parameters. At T1, 
CD patients exhibited a characteristic microbial profile mainly constituted of 
Proteobacteria (17.71%), Firmicutes (65.56%), Actinobacteria (8.46%) and 
Bacteroidetes (6.24%). Baseline bacterial abundances showed significant 
correlations with psychological markers of distress and with IFNγ. Following 
COBMINDEX, no significant changes in alpha and beta diversity were observed 
between both study groups, though a trend change in beta diversity was noted. 
Significant changes occurred in the abundance of phyla, families and genera only 
among the COBMINDEX group. Furthermore, abundance of phyla, families and genera 
that were altered following COBMNIDEX, significantly correlated with levels of 
cytokines and psychological parameters. Our results demonstrated that a 
short-term intervention of COBMINDEX was associated with changes in microbial 
indices, some of which are linked to psychological manifestations and systemic 
inflammation in CD patients. Psychological interventions to reduce chronic 
stress, such as COBMINDEX, appear to be beneficial in mitigating the 
pathobiology of CD patients, and may thus provide a useful adjunct to 
pharmacological therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2337269
PMCID: PMC11005811
PMID: 38591914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. Cell Host Microbe. 2024 Apr 10;32(4):527-542.e9. doi: 
10.1016/j.chom.2024.03.001. Epub 2024 Mar 20.

Opposing diet, microbiome, and metabolite mechanisms regulate inflammatory bowel 
disease in a genetically susceptible host.

Pereira GV(1), Boudaud M(2), Wolter M(3), Alexander C(1), De Sciscio A(2), Grant 
ET(3), Trindade BC(4), Pudlo NA(1), Singh S(1), Campbell A(1), Shan M(5), Zhang 
L(5), Yang Q(1), Willieme S(2), Kim K(4), Denike-Duval T(6), Fuentes J(1), 
Bleich A(7), Schmidt TM(8), Kennedy L(6), Lyssiotis CA(5), Chen GY(4), Eaton 
KA(1), Desai MS(9), Martens EC(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 4354 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(3)Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 4354 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; Faculty of Science, Technology and Medicine, 
University of Luxembourg, 4365 Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; 
Department of Molecular & Integrative Physiology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA.
(6)Unit for Laboratory Animal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, 
USA.
(7)Institute for Laboratory Animal Science, Hanover Medical School, Hanover, 
Germany.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Infection and Immunity, Luxembourg Institute of Health, 4354 
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg; Odense Research Center for Anaphylaxis, Department 
of Dermatology and Allergy Center, Odense University Hospital, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. Electronic address: mahesh.desai@lih.lu.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic address: emartens@umich.edu.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are chronic conditions characterized by 
periods of spontaneous intestinal inflammation and are increasing in 
industrialized populations. Combined with host genetics, diet and gut bacteria 
are thought to contribute prominently to IBDs, but mechanisms are still 
emerging. In mice lacking the IBD-associated cytokine, interleukin-10, we show 
that a fiber-deprived gut microbiota promotes the deterioration of colonic 
mucus, leading to lethal colitis. Inflammation starts with the expansion of 
natural killer cells and altered immunoglobulin-A coating of some bacteria. 
Lethal colitis is then driven by Th1 immune responses to increased activities of 
mucin-degrading bacteria that cause inflammation first in regions with thinner 
mucus. A fiber-free exclusive enteral nutrition diet also induces mucus erosion 
but inhibits inflammation by simultaneously increasing an anti-inflammatory 
bacterial metabolite, isobutyrate. Our findings underscore the importance of 
focusing on microbial functions-not taxa-contributing to IBDs and that some 
diet-mediated functions can oppose those that promote disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2024.03.001
PMCID: PMC11064055
PMID: 38513656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.C.M. works as a 
consultant and an advisory board member at January, Inc., United States. M.S.D. 
works as a consultant and an advisory board member at Theralution GmbH, Germany.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Feb 10;25(4):2164. doi: 10.3390/ijms25042164.

Changes in HLA-B27 Transgenic Rat Fecal Microbiota Following Tofacitinib 
Treatment and Ileocecal Resection Surgery: Implications for Crohn's Disease 
Management.

Blondeaux A(1)(2), Valibouze C(1)(2), Speca S(1), Rousseaux C(3), Dubuquoy C(3), 
Blanquart H(4), Zerbib P(1)(2), Desreumaux P(1)(2), Foligné B(1), Titécat M(1).

Author information:
(1)U1286-INFINITE-Institute for Translational Research in Inflammation, CHU 
Lille, Inserm, Univ. Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.
(2)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Lille University Hospital, 59037 
Lille, France.
(3)Intestinal Biotech Development, 1 Avenue Oscar Lambret, 59045 Lille, France.
(4)GenoScreen, 1 Rue du Pr Calmette, 59000 Lille, France.

The therapeutic management of Crohn's disease (CD), a chronic 
relapsing-remitting inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is highly challenging. 
Surgical resection is sometimes a necessary procedure even though it is often 
associated with postoperative recurrences (PORs). Tofacitinib, an orally active 
small molecule Janus kinase inhibitor, is an anti-inflammatory drug meant to 
limit PORs in CD. Whereas bidirectional interactions between the gut microbiota 
and the relevant IBD drug are crucial, little is known about the impact of 
tofacitinib on the gut microbiota. The HLA-B27 transgenic rat is a good 
preclinical model used in IBD research, including for PORs after ileocecal 
resection (ICR). In the present study, we used shotgun metagenomics to first 
delineate the baseline composition and determinants of the fecal microbiome of 
HLA-B27 rats and then to evaluate the distinct impact of either tofacitinib 
treatment, ileocecal resection or the cumulative effect of both interventions on 
the gut microbiota in these HLA-B27 rats. The results confirmed that the 
microbiome of the HLA-B27 rats was fairly different from their wild-type 
littermates. We demonstrated here that oral treatment with tofacitinib does not 
affect the gut microbial composition of HLA-B27 rats. Of note, we showed that 
ICR induced an intense loss of bacterial diversity together with dramatic 
changes in taxa relative abundances. However, the oral treatment with 
tofacitinib neither modified the alpha-diversity nor exacerbated significant 
modifications in bacterial taxa induced by ICR. Collectively, these preclinical 
data are rather favorable for the use of tofacitinib in combination with ICR to 
address Crohn's disease management when considering microbiota.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25042164
PMCID: PMC10889215
PMID: 38396840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors Christel Rousseaux and Caroline Dubuquoy 
were employed by the company “Intestinal Biotech Development”. The remaining 
authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial 
or financial relationships that could be construed as potential conflicts of 
interest. P.D. reports personal fees from several pharmaceutical companies, 
Abbott, Amgen, Biocodex, Biofortis, Biogen, Biokuris, Ferring, Fresenius, 
Janssen Kitozyme, Lesaffre, MSD, Norgine, Pfizer, Sandoz, Shire, Takeda, 
Tillotts, and UCB, outside of the submitted work. All other authors have nothing 
to disclose. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the 
collection, analyses, or interpretation of the data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results. The other authors declare 
no conflicts of interest.

1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2024 Feb;43(1):103-111. doi:
10.1007/s12664-024-01541-1.  Epub 2024 Feb 20.

Gut bacteriome in inflammatory bowel disease: An update on recent advances.

Bajaj A(1), Markandey M(1), Kedia S(1), Ahuja V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110 029, India.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110 029, India. vineet.aiims@gmail.com.

Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are chronic inflammatory gut disorders, 
majorly classified as ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. The complex, 
multifactorial etiopathogenesis of IBD involves genetic predisposition, 
environmental cues, aberrant mucosal immune response and a disturbed gut 
microbiota. Epidemiological trends, studies in gnotobiotic mice models and 
genome-wide association studies, identifying genes involved in microbial 
handling, together mount evidence in support of the gut microbiota playing a 
pivotal role in IBD pathogenesis. Both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis 
are characterized by severe dysbiosis of the gut microbiome, marked by an 
expansion of detrimental taxa and concomitant depletion of beneficial members. 
IBD is characterized by reduction in abundances of bacterial genera involved in 
production of short-chain fatty acids, bio-transformations of bile acids and 
synthesis of indole-based tryptophan compounds such as Faecalibacterium, 
Ruminococcus, Coprococcus, Dorea, Parabacteroides, Eubacterium, Oscillibacter 
and Prevotella and elevation in members of phyla Proteobacteria and 
Actinobacteria. This imbalance not only results in exaggerated immune signaling 
towards the microbial antigens, but also results in an altered metabolomic 
milieu that triggers additional inflammatory cascades. The present review 
provides insights into the bacterial dysbiosis observed across different 
intestinal sites and their metabolomic imprints participating in IBD.

© 2024. Indian Society of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-024-01541-1
PMID: 38374283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Feb 17;15(1):1470. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-45855-2.

Mucosal host-microbe interactions associate with clinical phenotypes in 
inflammatory bowel disease.

Hu S(#)(1)(2)(3), Bourgonje AR(#)(1), Gacesa R(1)(2), Jansen BH(1), Björk JR(1), 
Bangma A(1), Hidding IJ(1), van Dullemen HM(1), Visschedijk MC(1), Faber KN(1), 
Dijkstra G(1), Harmsen HJM(4), Festen EAM(1), Vich Vila A(1)(2), Spekhorst 
LM(1)(5), Weersma RK(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Precision Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Groningen, University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medisch Spectrum Twente, 
Enschede, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. 
r.k.weersma@umcg.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Disrupted host-microbe interactions at the mucosal level are key to the 
pathophysiology of IBD. This study aimed to comprehensively examine crosstalk 
between mucosal gene expression and microbiota in patients with IBD. To study 
tissue-specific interactions, we perform transcriptomic (RNA-seq) and microbial 
(16S-rRNA-seq) profiling of 697 intestinal biopsies (645 derived from 335 
patients with IBD and 52 from 16 non-IBD controls). Mucosal gene expression 
patterns in IBD are mainly determined by tissue location and inflammation, 
whereas the mucosal microbiota composition shows a high degree of individual 
specificity. Analysis of transcript-bacteria interactions identifies six 
distinct groups of inflammation-related pathways that are associated with 
intestinal microbiota (adjusted P < 0.05). An increased abundance of 
Bifidobacterium is associated with higher expression of genes involved in fatty 
acid metabolism, while Bacteroides correlates with increased metallothionein 
signaling. In patients with fibrostenosis, a transcriptional network dominated 
by immunoregulatory genes is associated with Lachnoclostridium bacteria in 
non-stenotic tissue (adjusted P < 0.05), while being absent in CD without 
fibrostenosis. In patients using TNF-α-antagonists, a transcriptional network 
dominated by fatty acid metabolism genes is linked to Ruminococcaceae (adjusted 
P < 0.05). Mucosal microbiota composition correlates with enrichment of 
intestinal epithelial cells, macrophages, and NK-cells. Overall, these data 
demonstrate the presence of context-specific mucosal host-microbe interactions 
in IBD, revealing significantly altered inflammation-associated gene-taxa 
modules, particularly in patients with fibrostenotic CD and patients using 
TNF-α-antagonists. This study provides compelling insights into host-microbe 
interactions that may guide microbiota-directed precision medicine and fuels the 
rationale for microbiota-targeted therapeutics as a strategy to alter disease 
course in IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-45855-2
PMCID: PMC10874382
PMID: 38368394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RKW acted as a consultant for Takeda, received 
unrestricted research grants from Takeda, Johnson & Johnson, Tramedico and 
Ferring and received speaker fees from MSD, Abbvie, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. 
GD received an unrestricted research grant from Takeda and speaker fees from 
Pfizer and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. All other authors declare no competing 
interests.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Feb 12;14(1):3479. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-54257-9.

Microbial butyrate capacity is reduced in inflamed mucosa in patients with 
ulcerative colitis.

Jangi S(1)(2), Moyer J(3), Sandlow S(3), Fu M(4), Chen H(4), Shum A(3), Hsia 
K(3), Cersosimo L(5), Yeliseyev V(5), Zhao N(6), Bry L(5), Michaud DS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA. 
sjangi@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(2)Proger 3, Division of Gastroenterology, Tufts Medical Center, 800 Washington 
Street, Boston, MA, 02111, USA. sjangi@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(3)Department of Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 221 Longwood Ave, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Public Health and Community Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Ma, USA.

Reduced butyrate-production capacity has been reported in fecal microbial 
communities in patients with active ulcerative colitis. However, the 
butyrate-production capacity of the mucosal microbiome from active vs quiescent 
mucosa in ulcerative colitis has been unexplored. We sought to determine the 
diversity and relative abundance of mucosal bacterial and fungal communities 
from endoscopically active vs quiescent mucosa in patients with UC, and aimed to 
predict contributions of mucosal microbial communities to butyrate synthesis. 
Systematic, segmental right- and left-sided biopsies were obtained from 
endoscopically active (n = 13) or quiescent (n = 17) colonic mucosa, among 15 
patients with pan-colonic ulcerative colitis. Dietary fiber intake of patients 
was performed using the validated five-item FiberScreen questionnaire. Amplicon 
sequencing of mucosal bacteria and fungi was performed. The diversity and 
relative abundance of mucosal bacterial and fungal taxa were quantified, and 
predicted contributions to butyrate synthesis were ascertained. Bacterial alpha 
and beta diversity were similar between active vs quiescent mucosa. Butyrogenic 
taxa were significantly increased in quiescence, including Butyricimonas, 
Subdoligranulum, and Alistipes. Predicted butyrate kinase activity was 
significantly and concomitantly increased in quiescent mucosa. Fiber intake was 
positively correlated with butyrogenic microbes. Compared to mucosal bacterial 
prevalence, mucosal fungi were detected in low prevalence. Butyrogenic microbes 
are relatively increased in quiescent mucosa in ulcerative colitis, and may be 
related to increased fiber intake during quiescence. Manipulation of the mucosal 
microbiome towards butyrate-producing bacteria may be associated with endoscopic 
quiescence.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-54257-9
PMCID: PMC10861456
PMID: 38347087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SJ: received consulting fees from Bristol Myers 
Squibb, JM, SS, HC, MF, AS, KH, LC, VY, NZ, LB, DM these authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 Jan 12;13:1324668. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1324668. eCollection 2023.

Mucosal microbiome of surgically treated terminal ileal Crohn's disease.

Loch FN(1), Kamphues C(2), Menzel P(3), Schwarzer R(3), Beyer K(1), Schineis 
C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member 
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Surgery, Park-Klinik Weißensee, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Labor Berlin - Charité Vivantes GmbH, Berlin, Germany.

Crohn's disease (CD) is associated with changes in the microbiome. The role of 
these changes and their precise association with disease course and activity 
remain ambiguous. In this prospective single-center study, the mucosal 
microbiome of surgical CD and non-CD patients was compared at the time of 
surgery. Microbial analyses were individually performed for ileal and colonic 
tissue samples obtained during surgery using 16S-rRNA-gene amplicon sequencing. 
Three groups out of the 46 included patients were formed: 1) a study group of CD 
of patients who received ileocecal resection due to CD involvement (CD study, 
n=10); 2) a control group of non-CD of patients who received intestinal 
resection due to indications other than CD (non-CD control, n=27); and 3) a 
second control group of CD who underwent resection of the intestine not affected 
by CD (CD non-affected control, n=9). Species richness and Shannon diversity 
were not different between all formed groups and regions analyzed (p>0.05). 
Several significant taxonomic differences were seen at the phylum-, order-, and 
genus-levels between the formed groups, such as a decrease of Firmicutes 
(phylum-level) and an increase of Bacteroides and 
Escherichia/Shigella/Pseudescherichia (genus-level) in CD study - colon vs. the 
non-CD control - colon (p ≤ 0.05). The CD non-affected control presented the 
largest amount of differentially abundant taxa in comparison to the other 
groups. These results underline that CD is accompanied by changes in affected 
and non-affected intestinal regions compared to non-CD controls. This study 
contributes the mucosal microbiome of a well-defined subset of surgical CD 
patients without confounding aspects of the fecal microbiome or regional 
microbial differences to the existing literature.

Copyright © 2024 Loch, Kamphues, Menzel, Schwarzer, Beyer and Schineis.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1324668
PMCID: PMC10811112
PMID: 38282618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors PM and RS were employed by the company 
Labor Berlin – Charité Vivantes GmbH. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 Jan 4;13:1304858. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1304858. eCollection 2023.

Exploring the intestinal ecosystem: from gut microbiota to associations with 
subtypes of inflammatory bowel disease.

Li F(1), Yu C(1), Zhao Q(1), Wang Z(1), Wang Z(1), Chang Y(1), Xu Z(1), Han 
X(1), Li H(1), Liu Y(1), Hu S(1), Chang S(1), Tang T(1), Li Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, China.

OBJECTIVE: Significant differences have been discovered between subtypes of 
Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). The role of gut microbiota in 
promoting the onset of UC and CD is established, but conclusions regarding 
subtype-specific analyses remain limited.
METHODS: This study aims to explore the influence of gut microbiota on subtypes 
of UC and CD, offering novel insights into the pathogenesis and treatment of UC 
and CD.Two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis was employed to examine 
the causal relationship between subtypes of UC and CD and gut microbiota 
composition. Gut microbiota data were sourced from the International Consortium 
MiBioGen, while UC and CD data were obtained from FINNGEN. Eligible single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected as instrumental variables. 
Multiple analytical approaches such as inverse variance-weighted (IVW), MR-Egger 
regression, weighted median, weighted mode, and MR-RAPS were utilized. 
Sensitivity analyses including MR-Egger intercept test, Cochran's Q test, and 
leave-one-out analysis were conducted for quality control. Subsequently, we 
employed multivariable IVW, MR-Egger, weighted median, and LASSO regression 
methods to identify independently significant genera or families and conducted 
sensitivity analyses.
RESULTS: We have determined that Hungatella, Acidaminococcaceae, and 15 other 
microbial taxa act as protective factors for various CD and UC subtypes, while 
Terrisporobacter, Anaerostipes, and 23 other microbial taxa are associated with 
increased risk for different CD and UC subtypes. Furthermore, through 
multivariable MR analysis, we have identified significant genera or families 
with independent effects.
CONCLUSION: Our study confirms a causal relationship between dysbiosis of gut 
microbiota and the occurrence of CD and UC subtypes. Furthermore, it validates 
etiological distinctions among different subtypes of CD and UC. A novel approach 
to adjunctive therapy involving distinct UC or CD subtypes may involve the use 
of probiotics and represents a potential avenue for future treatments.

Copyright © 2024 Li, Yu, Zhao, Wang, Wang, Chang, Xu, Han, Li, Liu, Hu, Chang, 
Tang and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1304858
PMCID: PMC10794348
PMID: 38239508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Brief Bioinform. 2023 Nov 22;25(1):bbad448. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbad448.

WSGMB: weight signed graph neural network for microbial biomarker 
identification.

Pan S(1), Jiang X(1), Zhang K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Data and Information, Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate 
School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518005, China.

The stability of the gut microenvironment is inextricably linked to human 
health, with the onset of many diseases accompanied by dysbiosis of the gut 
microbiota. It has been reported that there are differences in the microbial 
community composition between patients and healthy individuals, and many 
microbes are considered potential biomarkers. Accurately identifying these 
biomarkers can lead to more precise and reliable clinical decision-making. To 
improve the accuracy of microbial biomarker identification, this study 
introduces WSGMB, a computational framework that uses the relative abundance of 
microbial taxa and health status as inputs. This method has two main 
contributions: (1) viewing the microbial co-occurrence network as a weighted 
signed graph and applying graph convolutional neural network techniques for 
graph classification; (2) designing a new architecture to compute the role 
transitions of each microbial taxon between health and disease networks, thereby 
identifying disease-related microbial biomarkers. The weighted signed graph 
neural network enhances the quality of graph embeddings; quantifying the 
importance of microbes in different co-occurrence networks better identifies 
those microbes critical to health. Microbes are ranked according to their 
importance change scores, and when this score exceeds a set threshold, the 
microbe is considered a biomarker. This framework's identification performance 
is validated by comparing the biomarkers identified by WSGMB with actual 
microbial biomarkers associated with specific diseases from public literature 
databases. The study tests the proposed computational framework using actual 
microbial community data from colorectal cancer and Crohn's disease samples. It 
compares it with the most advanced microbial biomarker identification methods. 
The results show that the WSGMB method outperforms similar approaches in the 
accuracy of microbial biomarker identification.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bib/bbad448
PMCID: PMC10714318
PMID: 38084923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Nov 22;14:1264941. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1264941. 
eCollection 2023.

microBiomeGSM: the identification of taxonomic biomarkers from metagenomic data 
using grouping, scoring and modeling (G-S-M) approach.

Bakir-Gungor B(1), Temiz M(2), Jabeer A(1), Wu D(3)(4), Yousef M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Abdullah Gul 
University, Kayseri, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, 
Abdullah Gul University, Kayseri, Türkiye.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Division of Oral and Craniofacial Health Sciences, Adams School of Dentistry, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(5)Department of Information Systems, Zefat Academic College, Zefat, Israel.
(6)Galilee Digital Health Research Center (GDH), Zefat Academic College, Zefat, 
Israel.

Numerous biological environments have been characterized with the advent of 
metagenomic sequencing using next generation sequencing which lays out the 
relative abundance values of microbial taxa. Modeling the human microbiome using 
machine learning models has the potential to identify microbial biomarkers and 
aid in the diagnosis of a variety of diseases such as inflammatory bowel 
disease, diabetes, colorectal cancer, and many others. The goal of this study is 
to develop an effective classification model for the analysis of metagenomic 
datasets associated with different diseases. In this way, we aim to identify 
taxonomic biomarkers associated with these diseases and facilitate disease 
diagnosis. The microBiomeGSM tool presented in this work incorporates the 
pre-existing taxonomy information into a machine learning approach and 
challenges to solve the classification problem in metagenomics 
disease-associated datasets. Based on the G-S-M (Grouping-Scoring-Modeling) 
approach, species level information is used as features and classified by 
relating their taxonomic features at different levels, including genus, family, 
and order. Using four different disease associated metagenomics datasets, the 
performance of microBiomeGSM is comparatively evaluated with other feature 
selection methods such as Fast Correlation Based Filter (FCBF), Select K Best 
(SKB), Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGB), Conditional Mutual Information 
Maximization (CMIM), Maximum Likelihood and Minimum Redundancy (MRMR) and 
Information Gain (IG), also with other classifiers such as AdaBoost, Decision 
Tree, LogitBoost and Random Forest. microBiomeGSM achieved the highest results 
with an Area under the curve (AUC) value of 0.98% at the order taxonomic level 
for IBDMD dataset. Another significant output of microBiomeGSM is the list of 
taxonomic groups that are identified as important for the disease under study 
and the names of the species within these groups. The association between the 
detected species and the disease under investigation is confirmed by previous 
studies in the literature. The microBiomeGSM tool and other supplementary files 
are publicly available at: https://github.com/malikyousef/microBiomeGSM.

Copyright © 2023 Bakir-Gungor, Temiz, Jabeer, Wu and Yousef.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1264941
PMCID: PMC10703168
PMID: 38075911

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Feb;39(2):319-327. doi: 10.1111/jgh.16434. Epub 
2023 Dec 6.

Gut microbial signatures in clinically stable ulcerative colitis according to 
the mucosal state and associated symptoms.

Kim S(1), Jung Y(2)(3), Lee SB(1), Oh HS(2), Hong SN(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ulsan University Hospital, University of 
Ulsan College of Medicine, Ulsan, Korea.
(2)CJ Bioscience, Inc, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Interdisciplinary Program in Bioinformatics, Seoul National University, 
Seoul, Korea.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: The gut microbiome of patients with clinically stable 
ulcerative colitis (UC) differs from that of healthy individuals depending on 
the state of the colonic mucosa, especially with or without advanced scarring; 
however, the underlying mechanism is unclear. Therefore, this study examined the 
gut microbiome compositional signatures in patients with significant mucosal 
scarring and UC-related symptoms.
METHODS: Stool samples for gut microbiome analysis were prospectively collected 
from 57 patients with clinically stable UC between January 1 and December 31, 
2022. Data from 57 individuals without inflammatory bowel disease (non-IBD) 
paired by age and sex were selected from our previous study as the control 
group. The fecal samples were subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing. 
Associations between gut microbiome profiles and clinical or colonoscopic 
assessments were examined using diversity and differential abundance analyses.
RESULTS: Gut microbiome compositions between the patients with clinically stable 
UC and non-IBD controls differed significantly. Furthermore, gut microbiome 
compositions varied between the preserved and altered mucosa groups identified 
based on mucosal changes in the UC group. Differential abundance test of 
patients with UC for symptomatic remission based on stool frequency from the 
two-item patient-reported outcome identified several overlapping taxa specified 
as gut microbiome signatures, including the Enterobacteriaceae unknown genera 
(Enterobacteriaceae_g), Klebsiella, and several Lachnospiraceae spp. both in 
mucosal and symptom change analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: The gut microbiome can change with mucosal changes, even in 
clinically stable UC, and some gut microbial signatures may explain the symptom 
manifestations in patients with UC showing significant mucosal changes.

© 2023 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and John Wiley & 
Sons Australia, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jgh.16434
PMID: 38054580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Life Sci. 2024 Jan 1;336:122313. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122313. Epub 2023 Nov
 29.

Acute copper oxide nanoparticles exposure alters zebrafish larval microbiome.

Balasubramanian S(1), Haneen MA(2), Sharma G(2), Perumal E(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiar 
University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 641046, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Hyderabad, 
Sangareddy, Telangana 502285, India.
(3)Molecular Toxicology Laboratory, Department of Biotechnology, Bharathiar 
University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu 641046, India. Electronic address: 
ekas2009@buc.edu.in.

Copper oxide nanoparticles (CuO NPs) are being used in healthcare industries due 
to its antimicrobial properties. The increased consumption of NPs could lead to 
the rise of these NPs in the environment affecting the biological systems. 
Altered microbiome has been correlated to disease pathology in humans as well as 
xenobiotic toxicity in experimental animal models. However, CuO NPs-induced 
microbiome alterations in vertebrates have not been reported so far. In this 
study, for the first time, zebrafish larvae at 96 hpf (hours post fertilization) 
were exposed to CuO NPs for 24 h at 10, 20, and 40 ppm. After exposure, the 
control and treated larvae were subjected to 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing 
followed by relative taxa abundance, alpha and beta diversity analysis, single 
factor analysis, LEfSe, Deseq2, and functional profiling. No significant 
alteration was detected in the microbial richness and diversity, however, 
specific taxa constituting the core microbiome such as phylum Proteobacteria 
were significantly increased and Bacterioidetes and Firmicutes were decreased in 
the treated groups, indicating a core microbiota dysbiosis. Further, the family 
Lachnospiraceae, and genus Syntrophomonas involved in butyrate production and 
the metabolism of lipids and glucose were significantly altered. In addition, 
the opportunistic pathogens belonging to order Flavobacteriales were increased 
in CuO NPs treated groups. Moreover, the taxa involved in host immune response 
(Shewanella, Delftia, and Bosea) were found to be enriched in CuO NPs exposed 
larvae. These results indicate that CuO NPs exposure causes alteration in the 
core microbiota, which could cause colitis or inflammatory bowel disease.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2023.122313
PMID: 38035991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Apr 3;30(4):641-650. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izad232.

Exclusive Enteral Nutrition Mediates Beneficial Gut Microbiome Enrichment in 
Acute Severe Colitis.

Bajaj A(1), Markandey M(1), Singh M(1), Sahu P(1), Vuyyuru SK(1), Kante B(1), 
Kumar P(1), Verma M(1), Makharia G(1), Kedia S(1), Travis SPL(2)(3), Ahuja V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(2)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, University of Oxford and Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford and Oxford Biomedical 
Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Exclusive enteral nutrition (EEN) supplementation of the standard of 
care (SOC) augments steroid responsiveness in patients with acute severe 
ulcerative colitis (ASUC). EEN is known to alter gut microbial composition. The 
present study investigates EEN-driven gut microbial alterations in patients with 
ASUC and examines their correlations with clinical parameters.
METHODS: Stool samples from patients with ASUC (n = 44) who received either 
EEN-supplemented SOC (EEN group; n = 20) or SOC alone (SOC group; n = 24) for 7 
days were collected at baseline (day 0) and postintervention (day 7). Microbiome 
analysis was carried out using 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing followed by 
data processing using QIIME2 and R packages.
RESULTS: Seven-day EEN-conjugated corticosteroid therapy in patients with ASUC 
enhanced the abundances of beneficial bacterial genera Faecalibacterium and 
Veillonella and reduced the abundance of Sphingomonas (generalized linear model 
fitted with Lasso regularization with robustness of 100%), while no such 
improvements in gut microbiota were observed in the SOC group. The 
EEN-associated taxa correlated with the patient's clinical parameters (serum 
albumin and C-reactive protein levels). Unlike the SOC group, which retained its 
preintervention core microbiota, EEN contributed Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, a 
beneficial gut bacterial taxon, to the gut microbial core. EEN responders showed 
enhancement of Ligilactobacillus and Veillonella and reduction in Prevotella and 
Granulicatella. Analysis of baseline gut microbiota showed relative enhancement 
of certain microbial genera being associated with corticosteroid response and 
baseline clinical parameters and that this signature could conceivably be used 
as a predictive tool.
CONCLUSIONS: Augmentation of clinical response by EEN-conjugated corticosteroid 
therapy is accompanied by beneficial gut microbial changes in patients with 
ASUC.

Plain Language Summary: Exclusive enteral nutrition–supplemented corticosteroid 
therapy in acute severe ulcerative colitis (ASUC) is accompanied by the 
enrichment of beneficial gut microbial genera, which correlate negatively with 
the disease activity scores and objective inflammatory markers in ASUC. The 
baseline gut microbiota in ASUC associates with and may predict corticosteroid 
response.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Crohn’s 
& Colitis Foundation. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izad232
PMID: 37950921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Gigascience. 2022 Dec 28;12:giad083. doi: 10.1093/gigascience/giad083. Epub
2023  Oct 26.

Machine learning-based feature selection to search stable microbial biomarkers: 
application to inflammatory bowel disease.

Lee Y(1)(2), Cappellato M(3), Di Camillo B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, 
Seoul, 08826, Korea.
(2)Institute of Engineering Research at Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, 
Korea.
(3)Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova, Padova, 35122, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Biomarker discovery exploiting feature importance of machine 
learning has risen recently in the microbiome landscape with its high predictive 
performance in several disease states. To have a concrete selection among a high 
number of features, recursive feature elimination (RFE) has been widely used in 
the bioinformatics field. However, machine learning-based RFE has factors that 
decrease the stability of feature selection. In this article, we suggested 
methods to improve stability while sustaining performance.
RESULTS: We exploited the abundance matrices of the gut microbiome (283 taxa at 
species level and 220 at genus level) to classify between patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and healthy control (1,569 samples). We found 
that applying an already published data transformation before RFE improves 
feature stability significantly. Moreover, we performed an in-depth evaluation 
of different variants of the data transformation and identify those that 
demonstrate better improvement in stability while not sacrificing classification 
performance. To ensure a robust comparison, we evaluated stability using various 
similarity metrics, distances, the common number of features, and the ability to 
filter out noise features. We were able to confirm that the mapping by the 
Bray-Curtis similarity matrix before RFE consistently improves the stability 
while maintaining good performance. Multilayer perceptron algorithm exhibited 
the highest performance among 8 different machine learning algorithms when a 
large number of features (a few hundred) were considered based on the best 
performance across 100 bootstrapped internal test sets. Conversely, when 
utilizing only a limited number of biomarkers as a trade-off between optimal 
performance and method generalizability, the random forest algorithm 
demonstrated the best performance. Using the optimal pipeline we developed, we 
identified 14 biomarkers for IBD at the species level and analyzed their roles 
using Shapley additive explanations.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our work not only showed how to improve biomarker 
discovery in the metataxonomic field without sacrificing classification 
performance but also provided useful insights for future comparative studies.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press GigaScience.

DOI: 10.1093/gigascience/giad083
PMCID: PMC10600917
PMID: 37882604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Oct 2;14:1260266. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1260266. 
eCollection 2023.

The yin and yang of B cells in a constant state of battle: intestinal 
inflammation and inflammatory bowel disease.

Zogorean R(1), Wirtz S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik 1, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Medical Immunology Campus Erlangen, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Bavaria, 
Germany.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the 
gastrointestinal tract, defined by a clinical relapse-remitting course. 
Affecting people worldwide, the origin of IBD is still undefined, arising as a 
consequence of the interaction between genes, environment, and microbiota. 
Although the root cause is difficult to identify, data clearly indicate that 
dysbiosis and pathogenic microbial taxa are connected with the establishment and 
clinical course of IBD. The composition of the microbiota is shaped by plasma 
cell IgA secretion and binding, while cytokines such as IL10 or IFN-γ are 
important fine-tuners of the immune response in the gastrointestinal 
environment. B cells may also influence the course of inflammation by promoting 
either an anti-inflammatory or a pro-inflammatory milieu. Here, we discuss 
IgA-producing B regulatory cells as an anti-inflammatory factor in intestinal 
inflammation. Moreover, we specify the context of IgA and IgG as players that 
can potentially participate in mucosal inflammation. Finally, we discuss the 
role of B cells in mouse infection models where IL10, IgA, or IgG contribute to 
the outcome of the infection.

Copyright © 2023 Zogorean and Wirtz.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1260266
PMCID: PMC10577428
PMID: 37849749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2023 Oct 7;9(1):74. doi: 10.1038/s41522-023-00443-y.

Mitochondrial dysfunction promotes microbial composition that negatively impacts 
on ulcerative colitis development and progression.

Peña-Cearra A(1)(2)(3), Song D(4), Castelo J(1), Palacios A(1), Lavín JL(5), 
Azkargorta M(1)(6)(7), Elortza F(1)(6)(7), Fuertes M(5), Pascual-Itoiz MA(1), 
Barriales D(1), Martín-Ruiz I(1), Fullaondo A(2), Aransay AM(1)(6), Rodríguez 
H(1), Palm NW(4), Anguita J(8)(9), Abecia L(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Science 
and Technology Park Bld 801 A, 48160, Derio, Spain.
(2)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology, Faculty 
of Science and Technology, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48080, 
Bilbao, Spain.
(3)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Nursing, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48080, Bilbao, Spain.
(4)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
06519 CT, USA.
(5)Applied Mathematics Department - Bioinformatics Unit, NEIKER-Basque Institute 
for Agricultural Research and Development, Basque Research and Technology 
Alliance (BRTA), Parque Científico y Tecnológico de Bizkaia, P812, 48160, Derio, 
Spain.
(6)CIBERehd, ISCIII, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(7)ProteoRed-ISCIII, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(8)CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Science 
and Technology Park Bld 801 A, 48160, Derio, Spain. janguita@cicbiogune.es.
(9)Ikerbasque, Basque Foundation for Science, 48009, Bilbao, Spain. 
janguita@cicbiogune.es.
(10)CIC bioGUNE, Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Science 
and Technology Park Bld 801 A, 48160, Derio, Spain. leticia.abecia@ehu.eus.
(11)Department of Immunology, Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine 
and Nursing, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), 48080, Bilbao, Spain. 
leticia.abecia@ehu.eus.

Recent evidence demonstrates potential links between mitochondrial dysfunction 
and inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). In addition, bidirectional interactions 
between the intestinal microbiota and host mitochondria may modulate intestinal 
inflammation. We observed previously that mice deficient in the mitochondrial 
protein MCJ (Methylation-controlled J protein) exhibit increased susceptibility 
to DSS colitis. However, it is unclear whether this phenotype is primarily 
driven by MCJ-/- associated gut microbiota dysbiosis or by direct effects of 
MCJ-deficiency. Here, we demonstrate that fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) 
from MCJ-deficient into germ-free mice was sufficient to confer increased 
susceptibility to colitis. Therefore, an FMT experiment by cohousing was 
designed to alter MCJ-deficient microbiota. The phenotype resulting from complex 
I deficiency was reverted by FMT. In addition, we determined the protein 
expression pathways impacted by MCJ deficiency, providing insight into the 
pathophysiology of IBD. Further, we used magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) 
and 16S rRNA gene sequencing to characterize taxa-specific coating of the 
intestinal microbiota with Immunoglobulin A (IgA-SEQ) in MCJ-deficient mice. We 
show that high IgA coating of fecal bacteria observed in MCJ-deficient mice play 
a potential role in disease progression. This study allowed us to identify 
potential microbial signatures in feces associated with complex I deficiency and 
disease progression. This research highlights the importance of finding 
microbial biomarkers, which might serve as predictors, permitting the 
stratification of ulcerative colitis (UC) patients into distinct clinical 
entities of the UC spectrum.

© 2023. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-023-00443-y
PMCID: PMC10560208
PMID: 37805634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Gut Microbes. 2023 Dec;15(2):2262130. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2262130. Epub
 2023 Oct 2.

Diet and gut microbial associations in irritable bowel syndrome according to 
disease subtype.

Wang Y(1)(2), Ma W(1)(2), Mehta R(1)(2), Nguyen LH(1)(2)(3), Song M(1)(2)(4)(5), 
Drew DA(1)(2), Asnicar F(6), Huttenhower C(3)(7), Segata N(6)(8), Wolf J(9), 
Spector T(10), Berry S(11), Staller K(1)(2), Chan AT(1)(2)(5)(12).

Author information:
(1)Clinical and Translational Epidemiology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 677 
Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology, University of 
Trento, Trento, Italy.
(7)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(8)European Institute of Oncology Scientific Institute for Research, 
Hospitalization and Healthcare, Milan, Italy.
(9)Zoe Ltd, London, UK.
(10)Department of Twin Research, King's College London, London, UK.
(11)Department of Nutritional Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(12)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Department of Medicine, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.

The role of diet and the gut microbiome in the etiopathogenesis of irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS) is not fully understood. Therefore, we investigated the 
interplay between dietary risk factors and gut microbiota in IBS subtypes using 
a food frequency questionnaire and stool metagenome data from 969 participants 
aged 18-65 years in the ZOE PREDICT 1 study, an intervention study designed to 
predict postprandial metabolic responses. We identified individuals with IBS 
subtype according to the Rome III criteria based on predominant bowel habits 
during symptom onset: diarrhea (i.e. looser), constipation (i.e. harder), and 
mixed. Participants with IBS-D (n = 59) consumed more healthy plant-based foods 
(e.g. whole grains, leafy vegetables) and fiber, while those with IBS-C (n = 49) 
tended to consume more unhealthy plant-based foods (e.g. refined grains, fruit 
juice) than participants without IBS (n = 797). Microbial diversity was 
nominally lower in patients with IBS-D than in participants without IBS or with 
IBS-C. Using multivariable-adjusted linear regression, we identified specific 
microbiota variations in IBS subtypes, including slight increases in 
pro-inflammatory taxa in IBS-C (e.g. Escherichia coli) and loss of strict 
anaerobes in IBS-D (e.g. Faecalibacterium prausnitzii). Our analysis also 
revealed intriguing evidence of interactions between diet and Faecalibacterium 
prausnitzii. The positive associations between fiber and iron intake and 
IBS-diarrhea were stronger among individuals with a higher relative abundance of 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, potentially driven by carbohydrate metabolic 
pathways, including the superpathway of β-D-glucuronide and D-glucuronate 
degradation. In conclusion, our findings suggest subtype-specific variations in 
dietary habits, gut microbial composition and function, and diet-microbiota 
interactions in IBS, providing insights into potential microbiome-informed 
dietary interventions.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2262130
PMCID: PMC10549191
PMID: 37786251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ZOE PREDICT 1 was supported by Zoe Ltd., for 
which Dr. Chan and Dr. Drew served as investigators. Dr. Chan served as a 
consultant for Pfizer Inc. and Boehringer Ingelheim for unrelated studies and a 
grant support from Pfizer Inc. and Freenome for unrelated studies. Dr. 
Huttenhower and Dr. Segata are on the Scientific Advisory Board of Zoe Ltd. Dr. 
Berry and Dr. Spector have equity in Zoe Ltd. Mr. Wolf is an employee of Zoe 
Ltd. Dr. Staller has received research support from Ironwood and Urovant and has 
served as a consultant for Anji, Ardelyx, Arena, Gelesis, GI Supply, Restalsis, 
and Sanofi. No other disclosures have been reported.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2023 Sep 1;29(9):1362-1369. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izad058.

Gut Microbiota Composition in Long-Remission Ulcerative Colitis is Close to a 
Healthy Gut Microbiota.

Herrera-deGuise C(1)(2), Varela E(1)(2), Sarrabayrouse G(1)(2)(3), Pozuelo Del 
Río M(1)(2), Alonso VR(1)(2), Sainz NB(1)(2), Casellas F(1)(2), Mayorga 
LF(1)(2), Manichanh C(1)(2), Vidaur FA(1)(2), Guarner F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unitat Atenció Crohn-Colitis, Digestive System Department, Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Vall d'Hebron Institute of Research, Physiology and Digestive Physiopathology 
Research Group, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en el Área Tematica de 
Enfermedades Hepáticas, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Unité des technologies Chimiques et Biologiques pour la Santé, French 
National Centre for Scientific Research, National Institute for Health and 
Medical Research, Université de Paris, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Front Immunol. 2023 Nov 22;14:1306375. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1306375.

BACKGROUND: Microbiome studies report low gut microbial richness and diversity 
in ulcerative colitis (UC) patients. We explored whether UC patients who reach 
long-term clinical, endoscopic, and histological remission show a gut microbial 
ecosystem that is similar to healthy individuals.
METHODS: We collected 184 stool samples from 111 individuals (UC patients in 
long remission, short remission, flare, and healthy control subjects). 
Microbiota was analyzed by amplicon sequencing (16S ribosomal RNA) and 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction for specific taxa. All UC remission 
patients were followed-up for 2 years.
FINDINGS: A drop in species diversity and richness, underrepresentation of 
butyrate producers, and gain of potentially harmful bacteria were significantly 
detected in samples from disease-flare and short-remission patients. In 
contrast, Chao1 and Shannon indexes of diversity did not differ among patients 
in long remission and healthy control subjects. Long-remission patients also 
presented fecal bacterial composition closer to that in healthy control 
subjects. There was a positive correlation between Akkermansia muciniphila 
abundance and time in remission (rs = 0.53, P < .001). Logistic regression 
analysis showed that a high Shannon index (odds ratio, 4.83; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.5-20.6) or presence of A. muciniphila (odds ratio, 4.9; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.12-29.08) in fecal samples at entry was independently 
associated with clinical remission over a follow-up period of 24 months.
INTERPRETATION: UC patients who achieve long-term remission show evidence of 
substantial recovery of the gut microbial ecosystem in terms of diversity and 
composition. Recovery may just reflect adequate control of inflammatory 
activity, but higher bacterial diversity or the presence of A. muciniphila in 
fecal samples predicts flare-free outcomes.

Plain Language Summary: Microbiome studies have shown low gut microbial richness 
and diversity in ulcerative colitis patients. Patients who achieve long-term 
remission show evidence of substantial recovery of the gut microbial ecosystem 
in terms of diversity and composition.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Crohn’s 
& Colitis Foundation. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izad058
PMID: 37655859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Biomedicines. 2023 Jul 13;11(7):1979. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines11071979.

Identifying Microbiome Dynamics in Pediatric IBD: More than a Family Matter.

Dovrolis N(1)(2), Moschoviti A(3), Fessatou S(3), Karamanolis G(4), Kolios 
G(1)(2), Gazouli M(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Democritus University of 
Thrace, 68100 Alexandroupolis, Greece.
(2)Individualised Medicine & Pharmacological Research Solutions Center (IMPReS), 
68100 Alexandroupolis, Greece.
(3)Third Department of Pediatrics, "Attikon" General University Hospital, 
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 12462 Haidari, 
Greece.
(4)Gastroenterology Unit, Second Department of Surgery, Aretaieio Hospital, 
Medical School, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11527 Athens, 
Greece.
(5)Laboratory of Biology, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Medical School, 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11527 Athens, Greece.
(6)School of Science and Technology, Hellenic Open University, 26335 Patra, 
Greece.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic inflammatory 
intestinal disease that affects both children and adolescents. Symptoms can 
significantly affect a child's growth, development, and quality of life, making 
early diagnosis and effective management crucial. This study focuses on 
treatment-naïve pediatric IBD patients and their immediate families to identify 
the role of the microbiome in disease onset.
METHODS: Nine families with pediatric IBD were recruited, comprising seven 
drug-naïve Crohn's disease (CD) patients and two drug-naïve ulcerative colitis 
(UC) patients, as well as twenty-four healthy siblings/parents. Fecal samples 
were collected for 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing and bioinformatics 
analysis.
RESULTS: We identified patterns of dysbiosis and hallmark microbial taxa among 
patients who shared ethnic, habitual, and dietary traits with themselves and 
their families. In addition, we examined the impact of the disease on specific 
microbial taxa and how these could serve as potential biomarkers for early 
detection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a potential role of maternal factors in the 
establishment and modulation of the early life microbiome, consistent with the 
current literature, which may have implications for understanding the etiology 
and progression of IBD.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11071979
PMCID: PMC10377534
PMID: 37509618

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. BMC Gastroenterol. 2023 Jul 28;23(1):258. doi: 10.1186/s12876-023-02904-2.

Gut microbiota analyses of inflammatory bowel diseases from a representative 
Saudi population.

Alsulaiman RM(1), Al-Quorain AA(1), Al-Muhanna FA(1), Piotrowski S(2), Kurdi 
EA(3), Vatte C(4), Alquorain AA(1), Alfaraj NH(5), Alrezuk AM(1), Robinson F(2), 
Dowdell AK(2), Alamri TA(1), Hamilton L(2), Lad H(6), Gao H(6), Gandla D(6), 
Keating BJ(6), Meng R(2), Piening B(2), Al-Ali AK(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, King Fahd Hospital of the University, 
Alkhobar, Imam Abdulrahman bin Faisal University, Dammam, 31441, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Earle A Chiles Research Institute, Robert W. Franz Cancer Center, Portland, 
Oregon, OR, 97213, USA.
(3)King Fahd Hospital, Al Hafof, 36441, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman 
bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Al Qatif Central Hospital, Al Qatif, 32654, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Surgery, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania, PA, 19104, USA.
(7)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Imam Abdulrahman 
bin Faisal University, Dammam, Saudi Arabia. aalali@iau.edu.sa.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's diseases and ulcerative colitis, both of which are chronic 
immune-mediated disorders of the gastrointestinal tract are major contributors 
to the overarching Inflammatory bowel diseases. It has become increasingly 
evident that the pathological processes of IBDs results from interactions 
between genetic and environmental factors, which can skew immune responses 
against normal intestinal flora.
METHODS: The aim of this study is to assess and analyze the taxa diversity and 
relative abundances in CD and UC in the Saudi population. We utilized a 
sequencing strategy that targets all variable regions in the 16 S rRNA gene 
using the Swift Amplicon 16 S rRNA Panel on Illumina NovaSeq 6000.
RESULTS: The composition of stool 16 S rRNA was analyzed from 219 patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease and from 124 healthy controls. We quantified the 
abundance of microbial communities to examine any significant differences 
between subpopulations of samples. At the genus level, two genera in particular, 
Veillonella and Lachnoclostridium showed significant association with CD versus 
controls. There were significant differences between subjects with CD versus UC, 
with the top differential genera spanning Akkermansia, Harryflintia, Maegamonas 
and Phascolarctobacterium. Furthermore, statistically significant taxa diversity 
in microbiome composition was observed within the UC and CD groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion we have shown that there are significant differences 
in gut microbiota between UC, CD and controls in a Saudi Arabian inflammatory 
bowel disease cohort. This reinforces the need for further studies in large 
populations that are ethnically and geographically diverse. In addition, our 
results show the potential to develop classifiers that may have add additional 
richness of context to clinical diagnosis of UC and CD with larger inflammatory 
bowel disease cohorts.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12876-023-02904-2
PMCID: PMC10375692
PMID: 37507685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Sci Transl Med. 2023 Jul 26;15(706):eabn4722. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.abn4722.  Epub 2023 Jul 26.

Alterations in the gut microbiome implicate key taxa and metabolic pathways 
across inflammatory arthritis phenotypes.

Thompson KN(1)(2)(3), Bonham KS(1)(2), Ilott NE(4), Britton GJ(5), Colmenero 
P(4), Bullers SJ(4), McIver LJ(1)(3), Ma S(1)(2), Nguyen LH(1)(3)(6), Filer 
A(7)(8), Brough I(4)(9), Pearson C(4), Moussa C(4), Kumar V(4), Lam LH(4), 
Jackson MA(4), Pawluk A(1)(3); Inflammatory Arthritis Microbiome Consortium 
(IAMC) investigators group; Kiriakidis S(9), Taylor PC(9), Wedderburn 
LR(10)(11)(12), Marsden B(4), Young SP(13), Littman DR(14), Faith JJ(5), Pratt 
AG(15)(16)(17), Bowness P(9), Raza K(7)(8)(13), Powrie F(4), Huttenhower 
C(1)(2)(3)(18); IAMC.

Collaborators: Ciurtin C, Mauri C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Harvard 
University, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(3)Harvard Chan Microbiome in Public Health Center, Harvard T. H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedic, 
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, Oxford University, Oxford OX3 7FY, 
UK.
(5)Marc and Jennifer Lipschultz Precision Immunology Institute and Department of 
Genetics and Genomic Science, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(7)Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
University of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
(8)MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research and Research 
Into Inflammatory Arthritis Centre Versus Arthritis, University of Birmingham, 
Chesterfield S41 7TD, UK.
(9)Botnar Research Centre, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LD, UK.
(10)Centre for Adolescent Rheumatology Versus Arthritis, University College 
London, UCLH, and GOSH, Chesterfield S41 7TD, UK.
(11)NIHR Great Ormond Street Biomedical Research Centre, University College 
London, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(12)UCL GOS Institute of Child Health, University College London, London WC1N 
1EH, UK.
(13)Department of Rheumatology, Sandwell & West Birmingham NHS Trust, West 
Bromwich B71 4HJ, UK.
(14)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Kimmel Center for Biology and 
Medicine of the Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, 
New York, NY 10016, USA.
(15)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(16)Research into Inflammatory Arthritis Centre Versus Arthritis, Newcastle 
Birmingham, Glasgow, and Oxford, Chesterfield S41 7TD, UK.
(17)Department of Rheumatology, Musculoskeletal Services Directorate, Newcastle 
upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne NE7 7DN, UK.
(18)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T. H. Chan School 
of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Musculoskeletal diseases affect up to 20% of adults worldwide. The gut 
microbiome has been implicated in inflammatory conditions, but large-scale 
metagenomic evaluations have not yet traced the routes by which immunity in the 
gut affects inflammatory arthritis. To characterize the community structure and 
associated functional processes driving gut microbial involvement in arthritis, 
the Inflammatory Arthritis Microbiome Consortium investigated 440 stool shotgun 
metagenomes comprising 221 adults diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, 
ankylosing spondylitis, or psoriatic arthritis and 219 healthy controls and 
individuals with joint pain without an underlying inflammatory cause. Diagnosis 
explained about 2% of gut taxonomic variability, which is comparable in 
magnitude to inflammatory bowel disease. We identified several candidate 
microbes with differential carriage patterns in patients with elevated blood 
markers for inflammation. Our results confirm and extend previous findings of 
increased carriage of typically oral and inflammatory taxa and decreased 
abundance and prevalence of typical gut clades, indicating that distal 
inflammatory conditions, as well as local conditions, correspond to alterations 
to the gut microbial composition. We identified several differentially encoded 
pathways in the gut microbiome of patients with inflammatory arthritis, 
including changes in vitamin B salvage and biosynthesis and enrichment of iron 
sequestration. Although several of these changes characteristic of inflammation 
could have causal roles, we hypothesize that they are mainly positive feedback 
responses to changes in host physiology and immune homeostasis. By connecting 
taxonomic alternations to functional alterations, this work expands our 
understanding of the shifts in the gut ecosystem that occur in response to 
systemic inflammation during arthritis.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.abn4722
PMID: 37494472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2024 Jan;76(1):48-58. doi: 10.1002/art.42658. Epub 2023
Oct  19.

Shared and Distinct Gut Microbiota in Spondyloarthritis, Acute Anterior Uveitis, 
and Crohn's Disease.

Essex M(1), Rios Rodriguez V(2), Rademacher J(3), Proft F(2), Löber U(4), Markó 
L(4), Pleyer U(5), Strowig T(6), Marchand J(7), Kirwan JA(8), Siegmund B(2), 
Forslund SK(9), Poddubnyy D(10).

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center (ECRC; a cooperation of the Max 
Delbrück Center and Charité-Universitätsmedizin), Max Delbrück Center for 
Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC), and 
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin (a corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin), Berlin, Germany.
(2)Medical Department of Gastroenterology, Infectiology and Rheumatology, Campus 
Benjamin Franklin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Medical Department of Gastroenterology, Infectiology and Rheumatology, Campus 
Benjamin Franklin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, and Berlin Institute of 
Health (BIH) at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(4)ECRC, MDC, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin and German Center for 
Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Berlin, Germany.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Campus Virchow, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany, and Cluster 
of Excellence RESIST (EXC 2155), Hannover Medical School and Center for 
Individualized Infection Medicine (CiiM; a joint venture between the Helmholtz 
Center for Infection Research and the Hannover Medical School), Hannover, 
Germany.
(7)MDC and BIH Metabolomics Platform at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(8)MDC and BIH Metabolomics Platform at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany, and University of Nottingham School of Veterinary Medicine and 
Science, Loughborough, UK.
(9)ECRC, MDC, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, and DZHK, Berlin, and 
Structural and Computational Biology Unit, EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.
(10)Department of Gastroentergology, Infectiology and Rheumatology, Campus 
Benjamin Franklin, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin and German Rheumatism 
Research Center (DRFZ), Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Spondyloarthritis (SpA) is a group of immune-mediated diseases highly 
concomitant with nonmusculoskeletal inflammatory disorders, such as acute 
anterior uveitis (AAU) and Crohn's disease (CD). The gut microbiome represents a 
promising avenue to elucidate shared and distinct underlying pathophysiology.
METHODS: We performed 16S ribosomal RNA sequencing on stool samples of 277 
patients (72 CD, 103 AAU, and 102 SpA) included in the German Spondyloarthritis 
Inception Cohort and 62 back pain controls without any inflammatory disorder. 
Discriminatory statistical methods were used to disentangle microbial disease 
signals from one another and a wide range of potential confounders. Patients 
were naive to or had not received treatment with biological disease-modifying 
antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) for >3 months before enrollment, providing a better 
approximation of a true baseline disease signal.
RESULTS: We identified a shared, immune-mediated disease signal represented by 
low abundances of Lachnospiraceae taxa relative to controls, most notably 
Fusicatenibacter, which was most abundant in controls receiving nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drug monotherapy and implied to partially mediate higher serum 
C-reactive protein. Patients with SpA showed an enrichment of Collinsella, 
whereas human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-B27+ individuals displayed enriched 
Faecalibacterium. CD patients had higher abundances of a Ruminococcus taxon, and 
previous conventional/synthetic DMARD therapy was associated with increased 
Akkermansia.
CONCLUSION: Our work supports the existence of a common gut dysbiosis in SpA and 
related inflammatory pathologies. We reveal shared and disease-specific 
microbial associations and suggest potential mediators of disease activity. 
Validation studies are needed to clarify the role of Fusicatenibacter in 
gut-joint inflammation, and metagenomic resolution is needed to understand the 
relationship between Faecalibacterium commensals and HLA-B27.

© 2023 The Authors. Arthritis & Rheumatology published by Wiley Periodicals LLC 
on behalf of American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.42658
PMID: 37471465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Jan 5;30(1):9-19. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izad126.

Prediction of Response to Systemic Corticosteroids in Active UC by Microbial 
Composition-A Prospective Multicenter Study.

Blesl A(1), Wurm P(1)(2), Waschina S(3), Gröchenig HP(4), Novacek G(5), Primas 
C(5), Reinisch W(5), Kutschera M(5), Illiasch C(6), Hennlich B(6), Steiner P(7), 
Koch R(8), Tillinger W(9), Haas T(10), Reicht G(11), Mayer A(12), Ludwiczek 
O(13), Miehsler W(14), Steidl K(4), Binder L(1), Reider S(15)(16), Watschinger 
C(15)(16), Fürst S(1), Kump P(1), Moschen A(15)(16), Aden K(17)(18), Gorkiewicz 
G(2), Högenauer C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(3)Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Institute for Human Nutrition and Food 
Science, Nutriinformatics, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Brothers of Saint John of God Hospital, St. Veit an der Glan, Austria.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Hospital Landstraße, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Hospital Wels-Grieskirchen, Wels, Austria.
(8)Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria.
(9)Franziskus Hospital, Vienna, Austria.
(10)Darmpraxis, Salzburg, Austria.
(11)Brothers of Saint John of God Hospital, Graz, Austria.
(12)University Hospital, St.Pölten, Austria.
(13)Hospital Hall, Hall, Austria.
(14)Brothers of Saint John of God Hospital, Salzburg, Austria.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine 2 (Gastroenterology and Hepatology), Faculty 
of Medicine, Kepler University Hospital, Johannes Kepler University, Linz, 
Austria.
(16)Christian Doppler Laboratory for Mucosal Immunology, Johannes Kepler 
University Linz, Linz, Austria.
(17)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University and 
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(18)Department of Internal Medicine I, Christian-Albrechts-University and 
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Corticosteroids are used for induction of remission in patients with 
moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis. However, up to one-third of 
patients fail to this therapy. We investigated if fecal microbial composition or 
its metabolic capacity are associated with response to systemic corticosteroids.
METHODS: In this prospective, multicenter study, patients with active ulcerative 
colitis (Lichtiger score ≥4) receiving systemic corticosteroids were eligible. 
Data were assessed and fecal samples collected before and after 4 weeks of 
treatment. Patients were divided into responders (decrease of Lichtiger Score 
≥50%) and nonresponders. The fecal microbiome was assessed by the 16S rRNA gene 
marker and analyzed with QIIME 2. Microbial metabolic pathways were predicted 
using parsimonious flux balance analysis.
RESULTS: Among 93 included patients, 69 (74%) patients responded to 
corticosteroids after 4 weeks. At baseline, responders could not be 
distinguished from nonresponders by microbial diversity and composition, except 
for a subgroup of biologic-naïve patients. Within 4 weeks of treatment, 
responders experienced changes in beta diversity with enrichment of ascribed 
beneficial taxa, including Blautia, Anaerostipes, and Bifidobacterium, as well 
as an increase in predicted butyrate synthesis. Nonresponders had only minor 
longitudinal taxonomic changes with a significant increase of Streptococcus 
salivarius and a microbial composition shifting away from responders.
CONCLUSION: Baseline microbial diversity and composition seem to be of limited 
use to predict response to systemic corticosteroids in active ulcerative 
colitis. Response is longitudinally associated with restoration of microbial 
composition and its metabolic capacity.

© 2023 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izad126
PMCID: PMC10769779
PMID: 37463118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors are not aware of any affiliations, 
memberships, funding, or financial holdings that might be perceived as affecting 
the objectivity of this study.

1. mBio. 2023 Aug 31;14(4):e0075323. doi: 10.1128/mbio.00753-23. Epub 2023 Jul
11.

Single-strain behavior predicts responses to environmental pH and osmolality in 
the gut microbiota.

Ng KM(#)(1)(2), Pannu S(#)(1), Liu S(2), Burckhardt JC(1), Hughes T(3), Van 
Treuren W(4), Nguyen J(1), Naqvi K(2), Nguyen B(1), Clayton CA(1), Pepin DM(1), 
Collins SR(1), Tropini C(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of British Columbia , 
Vancouver, Canada.
(2)School of Biomedical Engineering, University of British Columbia , Vancouver, 
Canada.
(3)Independent Researcher , Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine , Stanford, California, USA.
(5)Humans and the Microbiome Program, Canadian Institute for Advanced Research , 
Toronto, Canada.
(#)Contributed equally

Changes to gut environmental factors such as pH and osmolality due to disease or 
drugs correlate with major shifts in microbiome composition; however, we 
currently cannot predict which species can tolerate such changes or how the 
community will be affected. Here, we assessed the growth of 92 representative 
human gut bacterial strains spanning 28 families across multiple pH values and 
osmolalities in vitro. The ability to grow in extreme pH or osmolality 
conditions correlated with the availability of known stress response genes in 
many cases, but not all, indicating that novel pathways may participate in 
protecting against acid or osmotic stresses. Machine learning analysis uncovered 
genes or subsystems that are predictive of differential tolerance in either acid 
or osmotic stress. For osmotic stress, we corroborated the increased abundance 
of these genes in vivo during osmotic perturbation. The growth of specific taxa 
in limiting conditions in isolation in vitro correlated with survival in complex 
communities in vitro and in an in vivo mouse model of diet-induced intestinal 
acidification. Our data show that in vitro stress tolerance results are 
generalizable and that physical parameters may supersede interspecies 
interactions in determining the relative abundance of community members. This 
study provides insight into the ability of the microbiota to respond to common 
perturbations that may be encountered in the gut and provides a list of genes 
that correlate with increased ability to survive in these conditions. IMPORTANCE 
To achieve greater predictability in microbiota studies, it is crucial to 
consider physical environmental factors such as pH and particle concentration, 
as they play a pivotal role in influencing bacterial function and survival. For 
example, pH is significantly altered in various diseases, including cancers, 
inflammatory bowel disease, as well in the case of over-the-counter drug use. 
Additionally, conditions like malabsorption can affect particle concentration. 
In our study, we investigate how changes in environmental pH and osmolality can 
serve as predictive indicators of bacterial growth and abundance. Our research 
provides a comprehensive resource for anticipating shifts in microbial 
composition and gene abundance during complex perturbations. Moreover, our 
findings underscore the significance of the physical environment as a major 
driver of bacterial composition. Finally, this work emphasizes the necessity of 
incorporating physical measurements into animal and clinical studies to better 
understand the factors influencing shifts in microbiota abundance.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.00753-23
PMCID: PMC10470613
PMID: 37432034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. mSphere. 2023 Aug 24;8(4):e0004623. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00046-23. Epub 2023
Jul  5.

Development of the intestinal microbiome in cystic fibrosis in early life.

Price CE(1), Hampton TH(1), Valls RA(1), Barrack KE(1), O'Toole GA(1), Madan 
JC(#)(2)(3)(4)(5), Coker MO(#)(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at 
Dartmouth , Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital at Dartmouth, Dartmouth Health 
, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Children's Hospital at Dartmouth, Dartmouth Health 
, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Hanover, 
New Hampshire, USA.
(5)Department of Quantitative Biomedical Data Science, Geisel School of Medicine 
at Dartmouth , Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(6)Department of Oral Biology, Rutgers School of Dental Medicine , Newark, New 
Jersey, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a heritable disease that causes altered physiology at 
mucosal sites; these changes result in chronic infections in the lung, 
significant gastrointestinal complications as well as dysbiosis of the gut 
microbiome, although the latter has been less well explored. Here, we describe 
the longitudinal development of the gut microbiome in a cohort of children with 
CF (cwCF) from birth through early childhood (0-4 years of age) using 16S rRNA 
gene amplicon sequencing of stool samples as a surrogate for the gut microbiota. 
Similar to healthy populations, alpha diversity of the gut microbiome increases 
significantly with age, but diversity plateaus at ~2 years of age for this CF 
cohort. Several taxa that have been associated with dysbiosis in CF change with 
age toward a more healthy-like composition; notable exceptions include 
Akkermansia, which decreases with age, and Blautia, which increases with age. We 
also examined the relative abundance and prevalence of nine taxa associated with 
CF lung disease, several of which persist across early life, highlighting the 
possibility of the lung being seeded directly from the gut early in life. 
Finally, we applied the Crohn's Dysbiosis Index to each sample, and found that 
high Crohn's-associated dysbiosis early in life (<2 years) was associated with 
significantly lower Bacteroides in samples collected from 2 to 4 years of age. 
Together, these data comprise an observational study that describes the 
longitudinal development of the CF-associated gut microbiota and suggest that 
early markers associated with inflammatory bowel disease may shape the later gut 
microbiota of cwCF. IMPORTANCE Cystic fibrosis is a heritable disease that 
disrupts ion transport at mucosal surfaces, causing a buildup of mucus and 
dysregulation of microbial communities in both the lungs and the intestines. 
Persons with CF are known to have dysbiotic gut microbial communities, but the 
development of these communities over time beginning at birth has not been 
thoroughly studied. Here, we describe an observation study following the 
development of the gut microbiome of cwCF throughout the first 4 years of life, 
during the critical window of both gut microbiome and immune development. Our 
findings indicate the possibility of the gut microbiota as a reservoir of airway 
pathogens and a surprisingly early indication of a microbiota associated with 
inflammatory bowel disease.

DOI: 10.1128/msphere.00046-23
PMCID: PMC10449510
PMID: 37404016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Nat Neurosci. 2023 Jul;26(7):1208-1217. doi: 10.1038/s41593-023-01361-0. Epub 
2023 Jun 26.

Multi-level analysis of the gut-brain axis shows autism spectrum 
disorder-associated molecular and microbial profiles.

Morton JT(#)(1)(2), Jin DM(3), Mills RH(4), Shao Y(5), Rahman G(6)(7), McDonald 
D(7), Zhu Q(8)(9), Balaban M(6), Jiang Y(10), Cantrell K(7)(11), Gonzalez A(7), 
Carmel J(12), Frankiensztajn LM(12), Martin-Brevet S(13), Berding K(14), Needham 
BD(15)(16), Zurita MF(17), David M(18), Averina OV(19), Kovtun AS(19)(20), Noto 
A(21), Mussap M(22), Wang M(23)(24), Frank DN(25), Li E(26), Zhou W(23), Fanos 
V(27), Danilenko VN(19), Wall DP(28), Cárdenas P(29), Baldeón ME(30), Jacquemont 
S(31)(32), Koren O(12), Elliott E(12)(33), Xavier RJ(34)(35)(36), Mazmanian 
SK(37), Knight R(7)(11)(38)(39), Gilbert JA(7)(39)(40), Donovan SM(14), Lawley 
TD(5), Carpenter B(1), Bonneau R(1)(3)(41), Taroncher-Oldenburg G(#)(42)(43).

Author information:
(1)Center for Computational Biology, Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Biostatistics & Bioinformatics Branch, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, Department of Biology, New York 
University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Precidiag, Inc., Watertown, MA, USA.
(5)Host-Microbiota Interactions Laboratory, Wellcome Sanger Institute, Hinxton, 
UK.
(6)Bioinformatics and Systems Biology Program, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(8)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(9)Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(10)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Jacobs School of 
Engineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(12)Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar Ilan University, Safed, Israel.
(13)Laboratory for Research in Neuroimaging, Centre for Research in 
Neurosciences, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Vaudois, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.
(14)Division of Nutritional Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.
(15)Stark Neurosciences Research Institute, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(16)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiology, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(17)Microbiology Institute and Health Science College, Universidad San Francisco 
de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
(18)Departments of Microbiology & Pharmaceutical Sciences, Oregon State 
University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(19)Vavilov Institute of General Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, 
Russia.
(20)Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Skolkovo, Russia.
(21)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(22)Laboratory Medicine, Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(23)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defects, Division of Neonatology, 
Children's Hospital of Fudan University, National Center for Children's Health, 
Shanghai, China.
(24)Microbiome Therapy Center, South China Hospital, Health Science Center, 
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(25)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, 
Aurora, CO, USA.
(26)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Stony 
Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(27)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit and Neonatal Pathology, Department of Surgical 
Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(28)Pediatrics (Systems Medicine), Biomedical Data Science, and Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(29)Institute of Microbiology, COCIBA, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, 
Quito, Ecuador.
(30)Facultad de Ciencias Médicas, de la Salud y la Vida, Universidad 
Internacional del Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
(31)Sainte Justine Hospital Research Center, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(32)Department of Pediatrics, Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada.
(33)The Leslie and Susan Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar Ilan 
University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
(34)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(35)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(36)Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(37)Division of Biology & Biological Engineering, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA.
(38)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA.
(39)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California, USA.
(40)Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(41)Prescient Design, a Genentech Accelerator, New York, NY, USA.
(42)Gaspar Taroncher Consulting, Philadelphia, PA, USA. gtaroncher@gmail.com.
(43)Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative, Simons Foundation, New York, 
NY, USA. gtaroncher@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by 
heterogeneous cognitive, behavioral and communication impairments. Disruption of 
the gut-brain axis (GBA) has been implicated in ASD although with limited 
reproducibility across studies. In this study, we developed a Bayesian 
differential ranking algorithm to identify ASD-associated molecular and taxa 
profiles across 10 cross-sectional microbiome datasets and 15 other datasets, 
including dietary patterns, metabolomics, cytokine profiles and human brain gene 
expression profiles. We found a functional architecture along the GBA that 
correlates with heterogeneity of ASD phenotypes, and it is characterized by 
ASD-associated amino acid, carbohydrate and lipid profiles predominantly encoded 
by microbial species in the genera Prevotella, Bifidobacterium, Desulfovibrio 
and Bacteroides and correlates with brain gene expression changes, restrictive 
dietary patterns and pro-inflammatory cytokine profiles. The functional 
architecture revealed in age-matched and sex-matched cohorts is not present in 
sibling-matched cohorts. We also show a strong association between temporal 
changes in microbiome composition and ASD phenotypes. In summary, we propose a 
framework to leverage multi-omic datasets from well-defined cohorts and 
investigate how the GBA influences ASD.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41593-023-01361-0
PMCID: PMC10322709
PMID: 37365313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.H.M. is Scientific Director at Precidiag, Inc. 
T.D.L. is a co-founder and Chief Scientific Officer of Microbiotica. S.K.M. is a 
co-founder and has equity in Axial Therapeutics. R.J.X. is a co-founder of 
Celsius Therapeutics and Jnana Therapeutics, a member of the Scientific Advisory 
Board at Nestle and a member of the Board of Directors at Moonlake 
Immunotherapeutics. R.B. is currently Executive Director of Prescient Design, a 
Genentech Accelerator. J.T.M. is the founder of Gutz Analytics and a co-founder 
of Integrated Omics AI. G.T.-O. is a Consultant-in-Residence at the Simons 
Foundation. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.

1. Gastroenterology. 2023 Sep;165(3):670-681. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2023.05.032. 
Epub 2023 May 30.

Gut Microbiome Composition Is Associated With Future Onset of Crohn's Disease in 
Healthy First-Degree Relatives.

Raygoza Garay JA(1), Turpin W(2), Lee SH(1), Smith MI(2), Goethel A(2), 
Griffiths AM(3), Moayyedi P(4), Espin-Garcia O(5), Abreu M(6), Aumais GL(7), 
Bernstein CN(8), Biron IA(9), Cino M(10), Deslandres C(11), Dotan I(9), 
El-Matary W(12), Feagan B(13), Guttman DS(14), Huynh H(15), Dieleman LA(16), 
Hyams JS(17), Jacobson K(18), Mack D(19), Marshall JK(4), Otley A(20), 
Panaccione R(21), Ropeleski M(22), Silverberg MS(10), Steinhart AH(10), Turner 
D(23), Yerushalmi B(24), Paterson AD(25), Xu W(26); CCC GEM Project Research 
Consortium; Croitoru K(48).

Collaborators: Abreu M(6), Beck P(27), Bernstein C(28), Croitoru K(29), Dieleman 
LA(16), Feagan B(30), Griffiths A(3), Guttman D(31), Jacobson K(18), Kaplan 
G(27), Krause DO(32), Madsen K(33), Marshall J(4), Moayyedi P(4), Ropeleski 
M(22), Seidman E(34), Silverberg M(10), Snapper S(35), Stadnyk A(36), Steinhart 
H(10), Surette M(37), Turner D(23), Walters T(38), Vallance B(39), Aumais G(40), 
Bitton A(34), Cino M(10), Critch J(41), Denson L(42), Deslandres C(43), 
El-Matary W(12), Herfarth H(44), Higgins P(45), Huynh H(15), Hyams JS(17), Mack 
D(46), McGrath J(47), Otley A(20), Panancionne R(21).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Zane Cohen Center for Digestive 
Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Zane Cohen Center for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Biostatistics Department, Princess Margaret 
Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(7)Hopital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(8)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Clinical and Research Center and Department of 
Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(9)Division of Gastroenterology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah-Tikva, Israel.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(11)Department of Hepatology and Pediatric Nutrition, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(12)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Max Rady College of Medicine, University of 
Manitoba, Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(13)Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Western 
Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(14)Center for the Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(16)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(17)Division of Digestive Diseases, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Connecticut 
Children's Medical Center, Hartford, Connecticut.
(18)Research Institute, British Columbia Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(19)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario and University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(20)Division of Gastroenterology, Izaak Walton Killam Hospital, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(21)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Unit, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.
(22)Gastrointestinal Diseases Research Unit, Department of Medicine, Queen's 
University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(23)The Juliet Keidan Institute of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 
Shaare Zedek Medical Center, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(24)Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Soroka University Medical Center and 
Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 
Israel.
(25)Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital for 
Sick Children Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(26)Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Biostatistics Department, Princess Margaret 
Cancer Center, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic 
address: wei.xu@uhnres.utoronto.ca.
(27)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(28)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Clinical and Research Centre and Department of 
Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
(29)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive 
Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(30)Departments of Medicine, Epidemiology, and Biostatistics, University of 
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
(31)Centre for the Analysis of Genome Evolution and Function, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(32)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(33)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine 
and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(34)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, McGill University Health 
Centre, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(35)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Boston Children's 
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(36)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, 
Canada.
(37)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(38)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(39)BC Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(40)Biostatistics Department, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health 
Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(41)Janeway Children's Health and Rehabilitation Centre and Department of 
Pediatrics, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada.
(42)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio.
(43)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(44)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(45)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan.
(46)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario and University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada. University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(47)Provincial Medical Genetics Program, Eastern Health, St. John's, 
Newfoundland, Canada.
(48)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Temerty Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Zane Cohen Center for Digestive 
Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
ken.croitoru@sinaihealth.ca.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2024 Feb;166(2):353-354. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2023.06.015.
    Gastroenterology. 2024 Feb;166(2):354-355. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2023.08.047.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The cause of Crohn's disease (CD) is unknown, but the current 
hypothesis is that microbial or environmental factors induce gut inflammation in 
genetically susceptible individuals, leading to chronic intestinal inflammation. 
Case-control studies of patients with CD have cataloged alterations in the gut 
microbiome composition; however, these studies fail to distinguish whether the 
altered gut microbiome composition is associated with initiation of CD or is the 
result of inflammation or drug treatment.
METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, 3483 healthy first-degree relatives 
(FDRs) of patients with CD were recruited to identify the gut microbiome 
composition that precedes the onset of CD and to what extent this composition 
predicts the risk of developing CD. We applied a machine learning approach to 
the analysis of the gut microbiome composition (based on 16S ribosomal RNA 
sequencing) to define a microbial signature that associates with future 
development of CD. The performance of the model was assessed in an independent 
validation cohort.
RESULTS: In the validation cohort, the microbiome risk score (MRS) model yielded 
a hazard ratio of 2.24 (95% confidence interval, 1.03-4.84; P = .04), using the 
median of the MRS from the discovery cohort as the threshold. The MRS 
demonstrated a temporal validity by capturing individuals that developed CD up 
to 5 years before disease onset (area under the curve > 0.65). The 5 most 
important taxa contributing to the MRS included Ruminococcus torques, Blautia, 
Colidextribacter, an uncultured genus-level group from Oscillospiraceae, and 
Roseburia.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to demonstrate that gut microbiome 
composition is associated with future onset of CD and suggests that gut 
microbiome is a contributor in the pathogenesis of CD.

Copyright © 2023 AGA Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2023.05.032
PMID: 37263307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Gut Microbes. 2023 Jan-Dec;15(1):2203963. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2203963.

Diverse but desolate landscape of gut microbial azoreductases: A rationale for 
idiopathic IBD drug response.

Simpson JB(1), Sekela JJ(1), Carry BS(1), Beaty V(1), Patel S(1), Redinbo 
MR(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC, USA.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Department of Microbiology and 
Immunology, and the Integrated Program for Biological and Genome Sciences, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Prodrugs reliant on microbial activation are widely used but exhibit a range of 
efficacies that remain poorly understood. The anti-inflammatory compound 
5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA), which is packaged in a variety of azo-linked 
prodrugs provided to most Ulcerative Colitis (UC) patients, shows confounding 
inter-individual variabilities in response. Such prodrugs must be activated by 
azo-bond reduction to form 5-ASA, a process that has been attributed to both 
enzymatic and non-enzymatic catalysis. Gut microbial azoreductases (AzoRs) are 
the first catalysts shown to activate azo-linked drugs and to metabolize toxic 
azo-chemicals. Here, we chart the scope of the structural and functional 
diversity of AzoRs in health and in patients with the inflammatory bowel 
diseases (IBDs) UC and Crohn's Disease (CD). Using structural metagenomics, we 
define the landscape of gut microbial AzoRs in 413 healthy donor and 1059 IBD 
patient fecal samples. Firmicutes encode a significantly higher number of unique 
AzoRs compared to other phyla. However, structural and biochemical analyses of 
distinct AzoRs from the human microbiome reveal significant differences between 
prevalent orthologs in the processing of toxic azo-dyes, and their generally 
poor activation of IBD prodrugs. Furthermore, while individuals with IBD show 
higher abundances of AzoR-encoding gut microbial taxa than healthy controls, the 
overall abundance of AzoR-encoding microbes is markedly low in both disease and 
health. Together, these results establish that gut microbial AzoRs are 
functionally diverse but sparse in both health and disease, factors that may 
contribute to non-optimal processing of azo-linked prodrugs and idiopathic IBD 
drug responses.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2203963
PMCID: PMC10132220
PMID: 37122075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.R.R. is a founder of Symberix, Inc., which is 
developing microbiome-targeted therapeutics. M.R.R. also receives research 
funding from Merck and Eli Lilly.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 15;24(8):7323. doi: 10.3390/ijms24087323.

Weighted Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis Identifies a Functional Guild and 
Metabolite Cluster Mediating the Relationship between Mucosal Inflammation and 
Adherence to the Mediterranean Diet in Ulcerative Colitis.

Strauss JC(1), Haskey N(2), Ramay HR(3), Ghosh TS(4), Taylor LM(1), Yousuf M(1), 
Ohland C(3), McCoy KD(3), Ingram RJM(1), Ghosh S(4), Panaccione R(1), Raman 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(2)Department of Biology, Irving K Barber Faculty of Science, University of 
British Columbia-Okanagan, 3137 University Way, Kelowna, BC V1V 1V7, Canada.
(3)International Microbiome Centre, HRIC 4AA08 Foothills Campus, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 1N4, Canada.
(4)APC Microbiome Ireland, College of Medicine and Health, University College 
Cork, College Road, National University of Ireland, T12 K8AF Cork, Ireland.

Diet influences the pathogenesis and clinical course of inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD). The Mediterranean diet (MD) is linked to reductions in 
inflammatory biomarkers and alterations in microbial taxa and metabolites 
associated with health. We aimed to identify features of the gut microbiome that 
mediate the relationship between the MD and fecal calprotectin (FCP) in 
ulcerative colitis (UC). Weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA) 
was used to identify modules of co-abundant microbial taxa and metabolites 
correlated with the MD and FCP. The features considered were gut microbial taxa, 
serum metabolites, dietary components, short-chain fatty acid and bile acid 
profiles in participants that experienced an increase (n = 13) or decrease in 
FCP (n = 16) over eight weeks. WGCNA revealed ten modules containing sixteen key 
features that acted as key mediators between the MD and FCP. Three taxa 
(Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Dorea longicatena, Roseburia inulinivorans) and a 
cluster of four metabolites (benzyl alcohol, 3-hydroxyphenylacetate, 
3-4-hydroxyphenylacetate and phenylacetate) demonstrated a strong mediating 
effect (ACME: -1.23, p = 0.004). This study identified a novel association 
between diet, inflammation and the gut microbiome, providing new insights into 
the underlying mechanisms of how a MD may influence IBD. See clinicaltrials.gov 
(NCT04474561).

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24087323
PMCID: PMC10138710
PMID: 37108484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: R.P.: Consultant, advisor, and speaker for 
Abbott, AbbVie, Alimentiv (formerly Robarts), Amgen, Arena Pharmaceuticals, 
AstraZeneca, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, 
Celltrion, Cosmos Pharmaceuticals, Eisai, Elan, Eli Lilly, Ferring, Galapagos, 
Fresenius Kabi, Genentech, Gilead Sciences, Glaxo-Smith Kline, JAMP Bio, 
Janssen, Merck, Mylan, Novartis, Oppilan Pharma, Organon, Pandion Pharma, 
Pendopharm, Pfizer, Progenity, Protagonist Therapeutics, Roche, Sandoz, Satisfai 
Health, Shire, Sublimity Therapeutics, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Theravance 
Biopharma, Trellus, Viatris, UCB. The remaining authors have no conflicts of 
interest to declare.

1. Bioinformatics. 2023 May 4;39(5):btad213. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad213.

Deciphering associations between gut microbiota and clinical factors using 
microbial modules.

Wang R(1)(2), Zheng X(1)(2), Song F(3), Wong MH(2), Leung KS(2)(4), Cheng 
L(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Shenzhen People's Hospital, First Affiliated Hospital of Southern University 
of Science and Technology, Second Clinical Medicine College of Jinan University, 
Shenzhen 518020, China.
(2)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong.
(3)School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 518000, 
China.
(4)Department of Applied Data Science, Hong Kong Shue Yan University, North 
Point, Hong Kong.
(5)Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, Shenzhen 
Clinical Research Center for Geriatrics, Shenzhen 518020, China.

MOTIVATION: Human gut microbiota plays a vital role in maintaining body health. 
The dysbiosis of gut microbiota is associated with a variety of diseases. It is 
critical to uncover the associations between gut microbiota and disease states 
as well as other intrinsic or environmental factors. However, inferring 
alterations of individual microbial taxa based on relative abundance data likely 
leads to false associations and conflicting discoveries in different studies. 
Moreover, the effects of underlying factors and microbe-microbe interactions 
could lead to the alteration of larger sets of taxa. It might be more robust to 
investigate gut microbiota using groups of related taxa instead of the 
composition of individual taxa.
RESULTS: We proposed a novel method to identify underlying microbial modules, 
i.e. groups of taxa with similar abundance patterns affected by a common latent 
factor, from longitudinal gut microbiota and applied it to inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD). The identified modules demonstrated closer intragroup 
relationships, indicating potential microbe-microbe interactions and influences 
of underlying factors. Associations between the modules and several clinical 
factors were investigated, especially disease states. The IBD-associated modules 
performed better in stratifying the subjects compared with the relative 
abundance of individual taxa. The modules were further validated in external 
cohorts, demonstrating the efficacy of the proposed method in identifying 
general and robust microbial modules. The study reveals the benefit of 
considering the ecological effects in gut microbiota analysis and the great 
promise of linking clinical factors with underlying microbial modules.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: 
https://github.com/rwang-z/microbial_module.git.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad213
PMCID: PMC10191612
PMID: 37084255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 May 2:2023.03.16.533047. doi: 
10.1101/2023.03.16.533047.

Biosynthetic Enzyme-guided Disease Correlation Connects Gut Microbial 
Metabolites Sulfonolipids to Inflammatory Bowel Disease Involving TLR4 
Signaling.

Older EA, Zhang J, Ferris ZE, Xue D, Zhong Z, Mitchell MK, Madden M, Wang Y, 
Chen H, Nagarkatti P, Nagarkatti M, Fan D, Ellermann M, Li YX, Li J.

Update in
    Nat Commun. 2024 Oct 30;15(1):9371. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-53670-y.

The trillions of microorganisms inhabiting the human gut are intricately linked 
to human health. At the species abundance level, correlational studies have 
connected specific bacterial taxa to various diseases. While the abundances of 
these bacteria in the gut serve as good indicators for disease progression, 
understanding the functional metabolites they produce is critical to decipher 
how these microbes influence human health. Here, we report a unique biosynthetic 
enzyme-guided disease correlation approach to uncover microbial functional 
metabolites as potential molecular mechanisms in human health. We directly 
connect the expression of gut microbial sulfonolipid (SoL) biosynthetic enzymes 
to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) in patients, revealing a negative 
correlation. This correlation is then corroborated by targeted metabolomics, 
identifying that SoLs abundance is significantly decreased in IBD patient 
samples. We experimentally validate our analysis in a mouse model of IBD, 
showing that SoLs production is indeed decreased while inflammatory markers are 
increased in diseased mice. In support of this connection, we apply bioactive 
molecular networking to show that SoLs consistently contribute to the 
immunoregulatory activity of SoL-producing human microbes. We further reveal 
that sulfobacins A and B, two representative SoLs, primarily target Toll-like 
receptor 4 (TLR4) to mediate immunomodulatory activity through blocking TLR4's 
natural ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) binding to myeloid differentiation 
factor 2, leading to significant suppression of LPS-induced inflammation and 
macrophage M1 polarization. Together, these results suggest that SoLs mediate a 
protective effect against IBD through TLR4 signaling and showcase a widely 
applicable biosynthetic enzyme-guided disease correlation approach to directly 
link the biosynthesis of gut microbial functional metabolites to human health.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.03.16.533047
PMCID: PMC10055157
PMID: 36993324

1. Sci Rep. 2023 Mar 16;13(1):4337. doi: 10.1038/s41598-023-31024-w.

Gut microbiome signatures of Yorkshire Terrier enteropathy during disease and 
remission.

Doulidis PG(1), Galler AI(1), Hausmann B(2)(3)(4), Berry D(2)(5), 
Rodríguez-Rojas A(1), Burgener IA(6).

Author information:
(1)Department for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Clinic for Small Animals and 
Horses, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria.
(2)Joint Microbiome Facility of the Medical University of Vienna, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Division of Microbiology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 
Austria.
(5)Centre for Microbiology and Environmental Systems Science, Department of 
Microbiology and Ecosystem Science, Division of Microbial Ecology, University of 
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(6)Department for Small Animal Internal Medicine, Clinic for Small Animals and 
Horses, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria. 
Iwan.Burgener@vetmeduni.ac.at.

The role of the gut microbiome in developing Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) in 
humans and dogs has received attention in recent years. Evidence suggests that 
IBD is associated with alterations in gut microbial composition, but further 
research is needed in veterinary medicine. The impact of IBD treatment on the 
gut microbiome needs to be better understood, especially in a breed-specific 
form of IBD in Yorkshire Terriers known as Yorkshire Terrier Enteropathy (YTE). 
This study aimed to investigate the difference in gut microbiome composition 
between YTE dogs during disease and remission and healthy Yorkshire Terriers. 
Our results showed a significant increase in specific taxa such as Clostridium 
sensu stricto 1, Escherichia-Shigella, and Streptococcus, and a decrease in 
Bacteroides, Prevotella, Alloprevotella, and Phascolarctobacterium in YTE dogs 
compared to healthy controls. No significant difference was found between the 
microbiome of dogs in remission and those with active disease, suggesting that 
the gut microbiome is affected beyond clinical recovery.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-31024-w
PMCID: PMC10018597
PMID: 36927871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2023 Feb 23;14:1107976. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1107976. 
eCollection 2023.

Current evidence and clinical relevance of drug-microbiota interactions in 
inflammatory bowel disease.

Becker HEF(1)(2), Demers K(1), Derijks LJJ(3)(4), Jonkers DMAE(1), Penders 
J(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division Gastroenterology-Hepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, NUTRIM 
School of Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre+, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Infection 
Prevention, NUTRIM School of Translational Research in Metabolism, Maastricht 
University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, Máxima Medical Center, 
Veldhoven, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Maastricht University Medical 
Centre+, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Infection 
Prevention, CAPHRI School of Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht 
University Medical Centre+, Maastricht, Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic relapsing-remitting 
disease. An adverse immune reaction toward the intestinal microbiota is involved 
in the pathophysiology and microbial perturbations are associated with IBD in 
general and with flares specifically. Although medical drugs are the cornerstone 
of current treatment, responses vary widely between patients and drugs. The 
intestinal microbiota can metabolize medical drugs, which may influence IBD drug 
(non-)response and side effects. Conversely, several drugs can impact the 
intestinal microbiota and thereby host effects. This review provides a 
comprehensive overview of current evidence on bidirectional interactions between 
the microbiota and relevant IBD drugs (pharmacomicrobiomics).
METHODS: Electronic literature searches were conducted in PubMed, Web of Science 
and Cochrane databases to identify relevant publications. Studies reporting on 
microbiota composition and/or drug metabolism were included.
RESULTS: The intestinal microbiota can both enzymatically activate IBD pro-drugs 
(e.g., in case of thiopurines), but also inactivate certain drugs (e.g., 
mesalazine by acetylation via N-acetyltransferase 1 and infliximab via 
IgG-degrading enzymes). Aminosalicylates, corticosteroids, thiopurines, 
calcineurin inhibitors, anti-tumor necrosis factor biologicals and tofacitinib 
were all reported to alter the intestinal microbiota composition, including 
changes in microbial diversity and/or relative abundances of various microbial 
taxa.
CONCLUSION: Various lines of evidence have shown the ability of the intestinal 
microbiota to interfere with IBD drugs and vice versa. These interactions can 
influence treatment response, but well-designed clinical studies and combined in 
vivo and ex vivo models are needed to achieve consistent findings and evaluate 
clinical relevance.

Copyright © 2023 Becker, Demers, Derijks, Jonkers and Penders.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2023.1107976
PMCID: PMC9996055
PMID: 36910207

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Food Funct. 2023 Mar 20;14(6):2836-2846. doi: 10.1039/d2fo03467k.

A high-sucrose diet causes microbiota composition shift and promotes the 
susceptibility of mice to Salmonella Typhimurium infection.

Liu J(1), Liu H(1), Teng Y(1), Qin N(1), Ren X(1), Xia X(1).

Author information:
(1)Dalian Polytechnic University, China. foodscixiaodong@dlpu.edu.cn.

A westernized diet characterized by high fat and sugar is tightly associated 
with the development of metabolic diseases and inflammatory bowel disease. 
Although a high-fat diet has been extensively studied for its involvement in 
various diseases, fewer studies have examined the impact of a high-sugar diet on 
the development of certain diseases, particularly enteric infections. This study 
aimed to explore the effect of a high sucrose diet on Salmonella 
Typhimurium-induced infection. C57BL/6 mice received a normal diet (Control) or 
a high sucrose diet (HSD) for eight weeks and then were infected by Salmonella 
Typhimurium. The high-sugar diet profoundly altered the relative abundance of 
certain microbial taxa. Bacteroidetes and Verrucomicrobiota were more abundant 
in normal diet-fed mice than in HSD-fed mice. Moreover, short-chain fatty acids 
(SCFAs) and branched-chain fatty acids (BCFAs) were significantly higher in mice 
from the control group than the HSD group. More S. Typhimurium counts in feces 
and other tissues were observed in HSD-fed mice after infection. Tight junction 
proteins and antimicrobial peptides were significantly decreased in HSD-fed 
mice. Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) demonstrated that mice that 
received normal fecal microbiota had lower Salmonella Typhimurium burdens 
compared with mice that received HSD fecal microbiota, indicating that the 
altered microbial communities are associated with the severity of infection. 
Together, these findings suggest that the excessive intake of sucrose disturbs 
intestinal homeostasis and predisposes mice to Salmonella-induced infection.

DOI: 10.1039/d2fo03467k
PMID: 36880221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Gut Microbes. 2023 Jan-Dec;15(1):2172670. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2172670.

Effect of food additives on key bacterial taxa and the mucosa-associated 
microbiota in Crohn's disease. The ENIGMA study.

Loayza JJJ(1), Kang S(1), Schooth L(1), Teh JJ(1), de Klerk A(1), Noon EK(1), 
Zhang J(2)(3)(4), Hu J(2)(3)(4), Hamilton AL(5)(6), Wilson-O'Brien A(5)(6), 
Trakman GL(5)(6), Lin W(4), Ching J(2)(3)(4), Or L(2)(3), Sung JJY(7), Yu 
J(2)(3), Ng SC(2)(3)(4)(8), Kamm MA(5)(6), Morrison M(1).

Author information:
(1)Frazer Institute, Faculty of Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Digestive Diseases, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(4)Microbiota I-Center (Magic), Hong Kong, China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Department of Medicine, the University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(7)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Centre for Gut Microbiota Research, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

Food additives have been linked to the pro-inflammatory microbial dysbiosis 
associated with Crohn's disease (CD) but the underlying ecological dynamics are 
unknown. Here, we examine how selection of food additives affects the growth of 
multiple strains of a key beneficial bacterium (Faecalibacterium prausnitzii), 
axenic clinical isolates of proinflammatory bacteria from CD patients (Proteus, 
Morganella, and Klebsiella spp.), and the consortia of mucosa-associated 
microbiota recovered from multiple Crohn's disease patients. Bacterial growth of 
the axenic isolates was evaluated using a habitat-simulating medium supplemented 
with either sodium sulfite, aluminum silicate, carrageenan, 
carboxymethylcellulose, polysorbate 80, saccharin, sucralose, or aspartame, 
intended to approximate concentrations found in food. The microbial consortia 
recovered from post-operative CD patient mucosal biopsy samples were challenged 
with either carboxymethylcellulose and/or polysorbate 80, and the bacterial 
communities compared to unchallenged consortia by 16S rRNA gene amplicon 
profiling. Growth of all F. prausnitzii strains was arrested when either sodium 
sulfite or polysorbate 80 was added to cultures at baseline or mid-exponential 
phase of growth, and the inhibitory effects on the Gram-negative bacteria by 
sodium sulfite were conditional on oxygen availability. The effects from 
polysorbate 80, saccharin, carrageenan, and/or carboxymethylcellulose on these 
bacteria were strain-specific. In addition to their direct effects on bacterial 
growth, polysorbate 80 and/or carboxymethylcellulose can drive profound changes 
in the CD mucosa-associated microbiota via niche expansion of Proteus and/or 
Veillonellaceae - both implicated in early Crohn's disease recurrence. These 
studies on the interaction of food additives with the enteric microbiota provide 
a basis for dietary management in Crohn's disease.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2172670
PMCID: PMC9980662
PMID: 36852457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. Commun Biol. 2023 Feb 25;6(1):221. doi: 10.1038/s42003-023-04592-w.

Interpersonal variability of the human gut virome confounds disease signal 
detection in IBD.

Stockdale SR(#)(1), Shkoporov AN(#)(1), Khokhlova EV(1), Daly KM(1), McDonnell 
SA(1), O' Regan O(1), Nolan JA(1), Sutton TDS(1), Clooney AG(1), Ryan FJ(1), 
Sheehan D(2), Lavelle A(1)(2), Draper LA(1), Shanahan F(1)(2), Ross RP(1), Hill 
C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Co, Cork, Ireland.
(2)Department of Medicine, University College Cork, Co, Cork, Ireland.
(3)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Co, Cork, Ireland. 
c.hill@ucc.ie.
(4)School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Co, Cork, Ireland. 
c.hill@ucc.ie.
(#)Contributed equally

Viruses are increasingly recognised as important components of the human 
microbiome, fulfilling numerous ecological roles including bacterial predation, 
immune stimulation, genetic diversification, horizontal gene transfer, microbial 
interactions, and augmentation of metabolic functions. However, our current view 
of the human gut virome is tainted by previous sequencing requirements that 
necessitated the amplification of starting nucleic acids. In this study, we 
performed an original longitudinal analysis of 40 healthy control, 19 Crohn's 
disease, and 20 ulcerative colitis viromes over three time points without an 
amplification bias, which revealed and highlighted the interpersonal 
individuality of the human gut virome. In contrast to a 16 S rRNA gene analysis 
of matched samples, we show that α- and β-diversity metrics of unamplified 
viromes are not as efficient at discerning controls from patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. Additionally, we explored the intrinsic properties 
of unamplified gut viromes and show there is considerable interpersonal 
variability in viral taxa, infrequent longitudinal persistence of intrapersonal 
viruses, and vast fluctuations in the abundance of temporal viruses. Together, 
these properties of unamplified faecal viromes confound the ability to discern 
disease associations but significantly advance toward an unbiased and accurate 
representation of the human gut virome.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s42003-023-04592-w
PMCID: PMC9968284
PMID: 36841913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2023 Feb 6;13:1129043. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2023.1129043. eCollection 2023.

Gut microbiome and mycobiome in inflammatory bowel disease patients with 
Clostridioides difficile infection.

Yu S(1), Ge X(2), Xu H(1), Tan B(1), Tian B(1), Shi Y(1), Dai Y(1), Li Y(1), Hu 
S(3)(4), Qian J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Microbial Resource and Big Data Center, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(4)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Clostridium difficile infection (CDI) is common in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and has been reported as a risk factor for poor 
outcome. However, gut microbiome and mycobiome of IBD patients with CDI have 
been barely investigated. This study aimed to assess the gut microbiome and 
mycobiome in IBD patients with CDI.
METHODS: We collected fecal samples from patients with active IBD and 
concomitant CDI (IBD-CDI group, n=25), patients with active IBD and no CDI 
(IBD-only group, n=51), and healthy subjects (HC, n=40). Patients' 
characteristics including demographic data, disease severity, and medication 
history were collected. Metagenomic sequencing, taxonomic and functional 
analysis were carried out in the samples.
RESULTS: We found that the bacterial alpha diversity of the IBD-CDI group was 
decreased. The bacterial and fungal beta diversity variations between IBD 
patients and HC were significant, regardless of CDI status. But the IBD-CDI 
group did not significantly cluster separately from the IBD-only group. Several 
bacterial taxa, including Enterococcus faecium, Ruminococcus gnavus, and 
Clostridium innocuum were overrepresented in the IBD-CDI group. Furthermore, IBD 
patients with CDI were distinguished by several fungal taxa, including 
overrepresentation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We also identified functional 
differences in IBD patients with CDI include enrichment of peptidoglycan 
biosynthesis. The network analysis indicated specific interactions between 
microbial markers in IBD-CDI patients.
CONCLUSION: IBD patients with CDI had pronounced microbial dysbiosis. Gut 
micro-ecological changes in IBD patients with CDI might provide insight into the 
pathological process and potential strategies for diagnosis and treatment in 
this subset of patients.

Copyright © 2023 Yu, Ge, Xu, Tan, Tian, Shi, Dai, Li, Hu and Qian.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2023.1129043
PMCID: PMC9940757
PMID: 36814443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Feb 1:2023.01.30.23285033. doi: 
10.1101/2023.01.30.23285033.

Higher alpha diversity and Lactobacillus blooms are associated with better 
engraftment after Fecal Microbiota Transplant in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Zhang YJ(1)(2)(3), Bousvaros A(1)(3), Docktor M(1)(4), Kaplan A(1)(4), Rufo 
PA(1)(4), Leier M(1)(4), Weatherly M(1)(4), Zimmerman L(1)(4), Nguyen LTT(2)(3), 
Barton B(1), Russell G(5), Alm EJ(2)(3), Kahn SA(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology/Nutrition, Boston Children's Hospital 300 Longwood Ave. 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
21 Ames St. Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)IBD Center, Boston Children's Hospital 300 Longwood Ave. Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Gastroenterology/Nutrition, Maine Medical Center 22 Bramhall St. Portland, 
ME, USA.

Update in
    Sci Rep. 2024 Aug 6;14(1):18188. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-68619-w.

BACKGROUND: Fecal Microbiota Transplant (FMT) has proven effective in treating 
recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection (rCDI) and has shown some success 
in treating inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). There is emerging evidence that 
host engraftment of donor taxa is a tenet of successful FMT. However, there is 
little known regarding predictors of engraftment. We undertook a double-blind, 
randomized, placebo-controlled pilot study to characterize the response to FMT 
in children and young adults with mild to moderate active Crohn's disease (CD) 
and ulcerative colitis (UC).
RESULTS: Subjects with CD or UC were randomized to receive antibiotics and 
weekly FMT or placebo in addition to baseline medications. The treatment arm 
received seven days of antibiotics followed by FMT enema and then capsules 
weekly for seven weeks. We enrolled four subjects with CD and 11 with UC, ages 
14-29 years. Due to weekly stool sampling, we were able to create a time series 
of alpha diversity, beta diversity and engraftment as they related to clinical 
response. Subjects exhibited a wide range of microbial diversity and donor 
engraftment as FMT progressed. Specifically, engraftment ranged from 26% to 90% 
at week 2 and 3% to 92% at two months. Consistent with the current literature, 
increases over time of both alpha diversity (p< 0.05) and donor engraftment (p< 
0.05) correlated with improved clinical response. Additionally, our weekly time 
series enabled an investigation into the clinical and microbial correlates of 
engraftment at various time points. We discovered that the post-antibiotic but 
pre-FMT time point, often overlooked in FMT trials, was rich in microbial 
correlates of eventual engraftment. Greater residual alpha diversity after 
antibiotic treatment was positively correlated with engraftment and subsequent 
clinical response. Interestingly, a transient rise in the relative abundance of 
Lactobacillus was also positively correlated with engraftment, a finding that we 
recapitulated with our analysis of another FMT trial with publicly available 
weekly sequencing data.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that higher residual alpha diversity and Lactobacillus 
blooms after antibiotic treatment correlated with improved engraftment and 
clinical response to FMT. Future studies should closely examine the host 
microbial communities pre-FMT and the impact of antibiotic preconditioning on 
engraftment and response.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.01.30.23285033
PMCID: PMC9915819
PMID: 36778473

1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 23;14:1048312. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1048312. 
eCollection 2023.

Network-based quantitative trait linkage analysis of microbiome composition in 
inflammatory bowel disease families.

Sharma A(1), Junge O(1), Szymczak S(2), Rühlemann MC(3)(4), Enderle J(5), 
Schreiber S(3)(6), Laudes M(7), Franke A(3), Lieb W(4), Krawczak M(1), Dempfle 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Informatics and Statistics, Kiel University, Kiel, 
Germany.
(2)Institute of Medical Biometry and Statistics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hospital Epidemiology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Epidemiology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, 
Kiel, Germany.
(7)Institute of Diabetology and Clinical Metabolic Research, Kiel University, 
Kiel, Germany.

Introduction: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is characterized by a dysbiosis 
of the gut microbiome that results from the interaction of the constituting taxa 
with one another, and with the host. At the same time, host genetic variation is 
associated with both IBD risk and microbiome composition. Methods: In the 
present study, we defined quantitative traits (QTs) from modules identified in 
microbial co-occurrence networks to measure the inter-individual consistency of 
microbial abundance and subjected these QTs to a genome-wide quantitative trait 
locus (QTL) linkage analysis. Results: Four microbial network modules were 
consistently identified in two cohorts of healthy individuals, but three of the 
corresponding QTs differed significantly between IBD patients and unaffected 
individuals. The QTL linkage analysis was performed in a sub-sample of the Kiel 
IBD family cohort (IBD-KC), an ongoing study of 256 German families comprising 
455 IBD patients and 575 first- and second-degree, non-affected relatives. The 
analysis revealed five chromosomal regions linked to one of three microbial 
module QTs, namely on chromosomes 3 (spanning 10.79 cM) and 11 (6.69 cM) for the 
first module, chr9 (0.13 cM) and chr16 (1.20 cM) for the second module, and 
chr13 (19.98 cM) for the third module. None of these loci have been implicated 
in a microbial phenotype before. Discussion: Our study illustrates the benefit 
of combining network and family-based linkage analysis to identify novel genetic 
drivers of microbiome composition in a specific disease context.

Copyright © 2023 Sharma, Junge, Szymczak, Rühlemann, Enderle, Schreiber, Laudes, 
Franke, Lieb, Krawczak and Dempfle.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2023.1048312
PMCID: PMC9901208
PMID: 36755569

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2023 Jul 5;29(7):1118-1132. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izad004.

Microbial Dynamics in Newly Diagnosed and Treatment Naïve IBD Patients in the 
Mediterranean.

Rausch P(1)(2), Ellul S(3), Pisani A(4), Bang C(1), Tabone T(4), Marantidis 
Cordina C(5), Zahra G(6), Franke A(1), Ellul P(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University of 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Laboratory of Genomics and Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Biology, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mater Dei Hospital, 
Malta.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Mater Dei Hospital, 
Malta.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Mater Dei Hospital, Malta.
(6)Molecular Diagnostics, Department of Pathology, Mater Dei Hospital, Malta.

BACKGROUND: Microbial communities have long been suspected to influence 
inflammatory processes in the gastrointestinal tract of patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease. However, these effects are often influenced by 
treatments and can rarely be analyzed in treatment-naïve onset cases. 
Specifically, microbial differences between IBD pathologies in new onset cases 
have rarely been investigated and can provide novel insight into the dynamics of 
the microbiota in Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC).
METHODS: Fifty-six treatment-naïve IBD onset patients (67.3% CD, 32.7% UC) and 
97 healthy controls were recruited from the Maltese population. Stool samples 
were collected after diagnosis but before administration of anti-inflammatory 
treatments. Fecal microbial communities were assessed via 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing and subjected to ecological analyses to determine disease-specific 
differences between pathologies and disease subtypes or to predict future 
treatment options.
RESULTS: We identified significant differences in community composition, 
variability, and diversity between healthy and diseased individuals-but only 
small to no differences between the newly diagnosed, treatment-naïve UC and CD 
cohorts. Network analyses revealed massive turnover of bacterial interactions 
between healthy and diseased communities, as well as between CD and UC 
communities, as signs of disease-specific changes of community dynamics. 
Furthermore, we identified taxa and community characteristics serving as 
predictors for prospective treatments.
CONCLUSION: Untreated and newly diagnosed IBD shows clear differences from 
healthy microbial communities and an elevated level of disturbance, but only the 
network perspective revealed differences between pathologies. Furthermore, 
future IBD treatment is to some extent predictable by microbial community 
characteristics.

Plain Language Summary: Treatment-naïve IBD onset patients from Malta show clear 
differences from healthy microbial communities and an elevated level of 
community disturbance, although differences between pathologies are only 
revealed by a network perspective. Furthermore, future IBD treatment is 
predictable by microbial community characteristics.

© 2023 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izad004
PMCID: PMC10320370
PMID: 36735955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Med Res Arch. 2022 Oct 31;10(10):10.18103/mra.v10i10.3318. doi: 
10.18103/mra.v10i10.3318.

Metagenomic and bile acid metabolomic analysis of fecal microbiota 
transplantation for recurrent Clostridiodes difficile and/or inflammatory bowel 
diseases.

Ramos RJ(1), Zhu C(2), Joseph DF(2), Thaker S(2), Lacomb JF(2), Markarian K(2), 
Lee HJ(2), Petrov JC(2), Monzur F(2), Buscaglia JM(2), Chawla A(2), Small-Harary 
L(2), Gathungu G(2), Morganstern JA(2), Yang J(2), Li J(2), Pamer EG(3), 
Robertson CE(4), Frank DN(4), Cross JR(1), Li E(2).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.
(2)Stony Brook University.
(3)University of Chicago.
(4)University of Colorado.

BACKGROUND: Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) is an effective treatment of 
recurrent Clostridioides difficile infections (rCDI), but has more limited 
efficacy in treating either ulcerative colitis (UC) or Crohn's disease (CD), two 
major forms of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). We hypothesize that FMT 
recipients with rCDI and/or IBD have baseline fecal bile acid (BA) compositions 
that differ significantly from that of their healthy donors and that FMT will 
normalize the BA compositions.
AIM: To study the effect of single colonoscopic FMT on microbial composition and 
function in four recipient groups: 1.) rCDI patients without IBD (rCDI-IBD); 2.) 
rCDI with IBD (rCDI+IBD); 3.) UC patients without rCDI (UC-rCDI); 4.) CD 
patients without rCDI (CD-rCDI).
METHODS: We performed 16S rRNA gene sequence, shotgun DNA sequence and 
quantitative bile acid metabolomic analyses on stools collected from 55 pairs of 
subjects and donors enrolled in two prospective single arm FMT clinical trials 
(Clinical Trials.gov ID NCT03268213, 479696, UC no rCDI ≥ 2x IND 1564 and 
NCT03267238, IND 16795). Fitted linear mixed models were used to examine the 
effects of four recipient groups, FMT status (Donor, pre-FMT, 1-week post-FMT, 
3-months post-FMT) and first order Group*FMT interactions on microbial diversity 
and composition, bile acid metabolites and bile acid metabolizing enzyme gene 
abundance.
RESULTS: The pre-FMT stools collected from rCDI ± IBD recipients had reduced 
α-diversity compared to the healthy donor stools and was restored post-FMT. The 
α-diversity in the pre-FMT stools collected from UC-rCDI or CD-rCDI recipients 
did not differ significantly from donor stools. FMT normalized some 
recipient/donor ratios of genus level taxa abundance in the four groups. Fecal 
secondary BA levels, including some of the secondary BA epimers that exhibit in 
vitro immunomodulatory activities, were lower in rCDI±IBD and CD-rCDI but not 
UC-rCDI recipients compared to donors. FMT restored secondary BA levels. 
Metagenomic baiE gene and some of the eight bile salt hydrolase (BSH) phylotype 
abundances were significantly correlated with fecal BA levels.
CONCLUSION: Restoration of multiple secondary BA levels, including BA epimers 
implicated in immunoregulation, are associated with restoration of fecal baiE 
gene counts, suggesting that the 7-α-dehydroxylation step is rate-limiting.

DOI: 10.18103/mra.v10i10.3318
PMCID: PMC9817289
PMID: 36618438

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest Statement None of the 
authors have a conflict of interest nor any financial disclosures with respect 
to this research or assistance with manuscript preparation.

1. Nat Biomed Eng. 2023 Jan;7(1):38-55. doi: 10.1038/s41551-022-00972-5. Epub
2022  Dec 22.

Treatment of peanut allergy and colitis in mice via the intestinal release of 
butyrate from polymeric micelles.

Wang R(#)(1)(2), Cao S(#)(1), Bashir MEH(#)(1), Hesser LA(1), Su Y(3)(4), Hong 
SMC(3)(4), Thompson A(3)(4), Culleen E(3)(4), Sabados M(3), Dylla NP(5), 
Campbell E(3)(6), Bao R(7)(8)(9), Nonnecke EB(10), Bevins CL(10), Wilson 
DS(1)(11), Hubbell JA(12)(13)(14), Nagler CR(15)(16)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(3)Biological Sciences Division, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Duchossois Family Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Committee on Microbiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(8)UPMC Hillman Cancer Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, CA, USA.
(11)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(12)Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL, USA. jhubbell@uchicago.edu.
(13)Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
jhubbell@uchicago.edu.
(14)Committee on Cancer Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
jhubbell@uchicago.edu.
(15)Pritzker School of Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL, USA. cnagler1@uchicago.edu.
(16)Biological Sciences Division, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
cnagler1@uchicago.edu.
(17)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
cnagler1@uchicago.edu.
(18)Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. 
cnagler1@uchicago.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

The microbiome modulates host immunity and aids the maintenance of tolerance in 
the gut, where microbial and food-derived antigens are abundant. Yet modern 
dietary factors and the excessive use of antibiotics have contributed to the 
rising incidence of food allergies, inflammatory bowel disease and other 
non-communicable chronic diseases associated with the depletion of beneficial 
taxa, including butyrate-producing Clostridia. Here we show that 
intragastrically delivered neutral and negatively charged polymeric micelles 
releasing butyrate in different regions of the intestinal tract restore 
barrier-protective responses in mouse models of colitis and of peanut allergy. 
Treatment with the butyrate-releasing micelles increased the abundance of 
butyrate-producing taxa in Clostridium cluster XIVa, protected mice from an 
anaphylactic reaction to a peanut challenge and reduced disease severity in a 
T-cell-transfer model of colitis. By restoring microbial and mucosal 
homoeostasis, butyrate-releasing micelles may function as an antigen-agnostic 
approach for the treatment of allergic and inflammatory diseases.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41551-022-00972-5
PMCID: PMC9870785
PMID: 36550307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.R.N. and J.A.H. are founders and shareholders 
of ClostraBio, Inc., which is developing the technology described in this study. 
R.W., S.C., M.E.H.B., D.S.W., C.R.N. and J.A.H. are inventors on patents filed 
by the University of Chicago describing the micelles reported in this study. The 
other authors declare no competing interests.

1. Cell Rep. 2022 Nov 15;41(7):111657. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111657.

Diet-induced modifications to human microbiome reshape colonic homeostasis in 
irritable bowel syndrome.

Bootz-Maoz H(1), Pearl A(1), Melzer E(2), Malnick S(3), Sharon E(1), Bennet 
Y(1), Tsentsarevsky R(1), Abuchatzera S(1), Amidror S(1), Aretz E(4), Azriel 
S(1), Gam Ze Letova C(1), Naama M(5), Shoval I(6), Yaron O(6), Karako-Lampert 
S(6), Bel S(5), Yissachar N(7).

Author information:
(1)The Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, 
Israel; Bar-Ilan Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar-Ilan 
University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Kaplan Medical Center, 
Rehovot, Israel; Hadassah Medical Center, the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Kaplan Medical Center, Rehovot, Israel; 
Hadassah Medical Center, the Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Kaplan Medical Center, 
Rehovot, Israel.
(5)Azrieli Faculty of Medicine, Bar-Ilan University, Safed, Israel.
(6)The Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, 
Israel.
(7)The Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, 
Israel; Bar-Ilan Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar-Ilan 
University, Ramat-Gan 5290002, Israel. Electronic address: 
nissan.yissachar@biu.ac.il.

Changes in microbiome composition are associated with a wide array of human 
diseases, turning the human microbiota into an attractive target for therapeutic 
intervention. Yet, clinical translation of these findings requires the 
establishment of causative connections between specific microbial taxa and their 
functional impact on host tissues. Here, we infuse gut organ cultures with 
longitudinal microbiota samples collected from therapy-naive patients with 
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) under a low-fermentable oligo-, di-, 
mono-saccharides and polyols (FODMAP) diet. We show that post-diet microbiota 
regulates intestinal expression of inflammatory and neuro-muscular gene sets. 
Specifically, we identify Bifidobacterium adolescentis as a diet-sensitive 
pathobiont that alters tight junction integrity and disrupts gut barrier 
functions. Collectively, we present a pathway discovery platform for mechanistic 
dissection and identification of functional diet-host-microbiota modules. Our 
data support the hypothesis that the gut microbiota mediates the beneficial 
effects of a low-FODMAP diet and reinforce the potential feasibility of 
microbiome-based therapies in IBS.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2022.111657
PMID: 36384106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2022 Nov 14;22(1):274. doi: 10.1186/s12866-022-02686-9.

Meta-analysis of 16S rRNA microbial data identified alterations of the gut 
microbiota in COVID-19 patients during the acute and recovery phases.

Cheng X(#)(1)(2), Zhang Y(#)(1), Li Y(1), Wu Q(1), Wu J(1), Park SK(3), Guo 
C(4), Lu J(5)(6)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, Guangdong 
Province, China.
(2)Guangzhou Nansha District Center for Disease Control and Prevention, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine and 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(4)Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, 10032, USA. cg2984@cumc.columbia.edu.
(5)School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, Guangdong 
Province, China. lujiahai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(6)One Health Center of Excellence for Research and Training, School of Public 
Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. lujiahai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(7)NMPA Key Laboratory for Quality Monitoring and Evaluation of Vaccines and 
Biological Products, Guangzhou, China. lujiahai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory for Tropical Disease Control, Ministry of Education, 
Guangzhou, China. lujiahai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(9)Research Institute of Sun Yat-Sen University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. 
lujiahai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(10)One Health Research Center, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, 571199, 
China. lujiahai@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Dozens of studies have demonstrated gut dysbiosis in COVID-19 
patients during the acute and recovery phases. However, a consensus on the 
specific COVID-19 associated bacteria is missing. In this study, we performed a 
meta-analysis to explore whether robust and reproducible alterations in the gut 
microbiota of COVID-19 patients exist across different populations.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted for studies published prior to May 
2022 in electronic databases. After review, we included 16 studies that 
comparing the gut microbiota in COVID-19 patients to those of controls. The 16S 
rRNA sequence data of these studies were then re-analyzed using a standardized 
workflow and synthesized by meta-analysis.
RESULTS: We found that gut bacterial diversity of COVID-19 patients in both the 
acute and recovery phases was consistently lower than non-COVID-19 individuals. 
Microbial differential abundance analysis showed depletion of anti-inflammatory 
butyrate-producing bacteria and enrichment of taxa with pro-inflammatory 
properties in COVID-19 patients during the acute phase compared to non-COVID-19 
individuals. Analysis of microbial communities showed that the gut microbiota of 
COVID-19 recovered patients were still in unhealthy ecostates.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provided a comprehensive synthesis to better understand 
gut microbial perturbations associated with COVID-19 and identified underlying 
biomarkers for microbiome-based diagnostics and therapeutics.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-022-02686-9
PMCID: PMC9662111
PMID: 36376804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Oct 14;13:961020. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.961020. 
eCollection 2022.

Strain level and comprehensive microbiome analysis in inflammatory bowel disease 
via multi-technology meta-analysis identifies key bacterial influencers of 
disease.

Ravichandar JD(1), Rutherford E(1), Chow CT(1), Han A(1), Yamamoto ML(1), 
Narayan N(1), Kaplan GG(2), Beck PL(2), Claesson MJ(3), Dabbagh K(1), Iwai S(1), 
DeSantis TZ(1).

Author information:
(1)Second Genome Inc., Brisbane, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a heterogenous disease in which 
the microbiome has been shown to play an important role. However, the precise 
homeostatic or pathological functions played by bacteria remain unclear. Most 
published studies report taxa-disease associations based on single-technology 
analysis of a single cohort, potentially biasing results to one clinical 
protocol, cohort, and molecular analysis technology. To begin to address this 
key question, precise identification of the bacteria implicated in IBD across 
cohorts is necessary.
METHODS: We sought to take advantage of the numerous and diverse studies 
characterizing the microbiome in IBD to develop a multi-technology meta-analysis 
(MTMA) as a platform for aggregation of independently generated datasets, 
irrespective of DNA-profiling technique, in order to uncover the consistent 
microbial modulators of disease. We report the largest strain-level survey of 
IBD, integrating microbiome profiles from 3,407 samples from 21 datasets 
spanning 15 cohorts, three of which are presented for the first time in the 
current study, characterized using three DNA-profiling technologies, mapping all 
nucleotide data against known, culturable strain reference data.
RESULTS: We identify several novel IBD associations with culturable strains that 
have so far remained elusive, including two genome-sequenced but uncharacterized 
Lachnospiraceae strains consistently decreased in both the gut luminal and 
mucosal contents of patients with IBD, and demonstrate that these strains are 
correlated with inflammation-related pathways that are known mechanisms targeted 
for treatment. Furthermore, comparative MTMA at the species versus strain level 
reveals that not all significant strain associations resulted in a corresponding 
species-level significance and conversely significant species associations are 
not always re-captured at the strain level.
CONCLUSION: We propose MTMA for uncovering experimentally testable 
strain-disease associations that, as demonstrated here, are beneficial in 
discovering mechanisms underpinning microbiome impact on disease or novel 
targets for therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2022 Ravichandar, Rutherford, Chow, Han, Yamamoto, Narayan, Kaplan, 
Beck, Claesson, Dabbagh, Iwai and DeSantis.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.961020
PMCID: PMC9614153
PMID: 36312950

Conflict of interest statement: Authors JR, ER, MY, NN, KD, and TD were employed 
by Second Genome, Inc., and hold stock options in Second Genome, Inc. C-EC, AH, 
and SI own shares in Second Genome, Inc. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Oct 7;12:1010853. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853. eCollection 2022.

The oral-gut axis: Salivary and fecal microbiome dysbiosis in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease.

Abdelbary MMH(1), Hatting M(2), Bott A(1), Dahlhausen A(3), Keller D(3), 
Trautwein C(2), Conrads G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Operative 
Dentistry, Periodontology and Preventive Dentistry, Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule (RWTH) University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine III, RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(3)University Medical Center for Occupational Medicine, RWTH University, Aachen, 
Germany.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic inflammatory disorders 
that fall into two main categories: Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis 
(UC). The gastrointestinal tract extends from the mouth to the anus and harbors 
diverse bacterial communities. Several sequencing-based studies have identified 
an intestinal enrichment of oral-associated bacteria and demonstrated their 
ability to induce intestinal inflammation in mice, suggesting that intestinal 
pathobionts originate from the oral cavity, particularly members of the genus 
Streptococcus. This study aimed to investigate the composition of the salivary 
and fecal microbiome of IBD patients (n = 14) compared to healthy controls (n = 
12) and to determine the abundance of common bacterial taxa in both niches. 
Metagenomic DNA was extracted from saliva and fecal samples, and the 16S rRNA 
gene was targeted for sequencing. Our results revealed that the overall 
microbial composition of saliva was significantly altered in the IBD patients 
compared to the control subjects (p = 0.038). At the genus level, Veillonella 
and Prevotella were highly abundant in IBD (median: 25.4% and 22.2%, 
respectively) compared to the control group (17.9% and 13.4%, respectively). In 
contrast, Neisseria, Streptococcus, Haemophilus, and Fusobacterium were 
associated with a healthy gut state. Regarding the fecal microbiome, the IBD 
group had a significantly higher abundance of Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and 
Escherichia-Shigella (both comprising pathogenic bacteria) compared with the 
control group. Members of both bacterial groups have previously been shown to 
positively correlate with intestinal inflammation and high expression of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines that disrupt intestinal barrier integrity. In 
addition, we demonstrate that the increased abundance of Clostridium sensu 
stricto 1 and Escherichia-Shigella has also been associated with significant 
upregulation of certain metabolic pathways in the feces of the IBD group, 
including bacterial invasion of epithelial cells. Streptococcus was the only 
common genus detected in both the salivary and fecal microbiome and represented 
the oral-gut axis in our study. Using culture-based methods, we isolated 57 and 
91 Streptococcus strains from saliva as well as 40 and 31 strains from fecal 
samples of the controls and IBD patients, respectively. The phylogenetic tree of 
streptococci based on sodA sequences revealed several patient-specific clusters 
comprising salivary and fecal streptococcal isolates from the same patient and 
belonging to the same species, suggesting that the oral cavity is an endogenous 
reservoir for intestinal strains.

Copyright © 2022 Abdelbary, Hatting, Bott, Dahlhausen, Keller, Trautwein and 
Conrads.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853
PMCID: PMC9585322
PMID: 36275026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Genome Biol. 2022 Oct 3;23(1):208. doi: 10.1186/s13059-022-02753-4.

Population structure discovery in meta-analyzed microbial communities and 
inflammatory bowel disease using MMUPHin.

Ma S(1), Shungin D(2), Mallick H(2), Schirmer M(2), Nguyen LH(3), Kolde R(2), 
Franzosa E(1), Vlamakis H(2), Xavier R(4), Huttenhower C(5).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Chan Microbiome in Public Health Center, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(3)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA. 
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.
(5)Harvard Chan Microbiome in Public Health Center, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, Boston, MA, USA. chuttenh@hsph.harvard.edu.

Microbiome studies of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) have achieved a scale 
for meta-analysis of dysbioses among populations. To enable microbial community 
meta-analyses generally, we develop MMUPHin for normalization, statistical 
meta-analysis, and population structure discovery using microbial taxonomic and 
functional profiles. Applying it to ten IBD cohorts, we identify consistent 
associations, including novel taxa such as Acinetobacter and Turicibacter, and 
additional exposure and interaction effects. A single gradient of dysbiosis 
severity is favored over discrete types to summarize IBD microbiome population 
structure. These results provide a benchmark for characterization of IBD and a 
framework for meta-analysis of any microbial communities.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-022-02753-4
PMCID: PMC9531436
PMID: 36192803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CH is on the Scientific Advisory Board for Seres 
Therapeutics and Empress Therapeutics.

1. Immunity. 2022 Oct 11;55(10):1909-1923.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2022.08.016. 
Epub 2022 Sep 16.

The CD4(+) T cell response to a commensal-derived epitope transitions from a 
tolerant to an inflammatory state in Crohn's disease.

Pedersen TK(1), Brown EM(2), Plichta DR(3), Johansen J(4), Twardus SW(5), 
Delorey TM(6), Lau H(5), Vlamakis H(3), Moon JJ(7), Xavier RJ(8), Graham DB(9).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Disease Systems Immunology, Department of 
Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Section for Protein Science and Biotherapeutics, 
Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark.
(2)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Computational and Integrative 
Biology, Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(3)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
(4)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein 
Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Department of Medicine, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(6)Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA.
(7)Center for Immunology and Inflammatory Diseases and Division of Pulmonary and 
Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
(8)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Computational and Integrative 
Biology, Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for the Study of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Klarman Cell 
Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; 
Center for Microbiome Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. Electronic address: 
xavier@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu.
(9)Infectious Disease and Microbiome Program, The Broad Institute of MIT and 
Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Center for Computational and Integrative 
Biology, Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for the Study of 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for Microbiome 
Informatics and Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
MA 02139, USA. Electronic address: dgraham@broadinstitute.org.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2022 Oct 11;55(10):1758-1760. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2022.09.010.

Reciprocal interactions between host T helper cells and gut microbiota enforce 
local immunological tolerance and modulate extra-intestinal immunity. However, 
our understanding of antigen-specific tolerance to the microbiome is limited. 
Here, we developed a systematic approach to predict HLA class-II-specific 
epitopes using the humanized bacteria-originated T cell antigen (hBOTA) 
algorithm. We identified a diverse set of microbiome epitopes spanning all major 
taxa that are compatible with presentation by multiple HLA-II alleles. In 
particular, we uncovered an immunodominant epitope from the TonB-dependent 
receptor SusC that was universally recognized and ubiquitous among 
Bacteroidales. In healthy human subjects, SusC-reactive T cell responses were 
characterized by IL-10-dominant cytokine profiles, whereas in patients with 
active Crohn's disease, responses were associated with elevated IL-17A. Our 
results highlight the potential of targeted antigen discovery within the 
microbiome to reveal principles of tolerance and functional transitions during 
inflammation.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.immuni.2022.08.016
PMCID: PMC9890645
PMID: 36115338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests R.J.X. is a co-founder 
of Celsius Therapeutics and Jnana Therapeutics, and a member of the Scientific 
Advisory Board of Nestle, as well as a member of the Board of Directors at 
Moonlake Immunotherapeutics.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2023 Jan 5;29(1):125-139. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izac194.

Searching for a Consensus Among Inflammatory Bowel Disease Studies: A Systematic 
Meta-Analysis.

Abdel-Rahman LIH(1), Morgan XC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Numerous studies have examined the gut microbial ecology of patients 
with Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis, but inflammatory bowel 
disease-associated taxa and ecological effect sizes are not consistent between 
studies.
METHODS: We systematically searched PubMed and Google Scholar and performed a 
meta-analysis of 13 studies to analyze how variables such as sample type (stool, 
biopsy, and lavage) affect results in inflammatory bowel disease gut microbiome 
studies, using uniform bioinformatic methods for all primary data.
RESULTS: Reduced alpha diversity was a consistent feature of both CD and 
ulcerative colitis but was more pronounced in CD. Disease contributed 
significantly variation in beta diversity in most studies, but effect size 
varied, and the effect of sample type was greater than the effect of disease. 
Fusobacterium was the genus most consistently associated with CD, but 
disease-associated genera were mostly inconsistent between studies. Stool 
studies had lower heterogeneity than biopsy studies, especially for CD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that sample type variation is an important 
contributor to study variability that should be carefully considered during 
study design, and stool is likely superior to biopsy for CD studies due to its 
lower heterogeneity.

Plain Language Summary: To assess reproducibility in inflammatory bowel disease 
microbiome research, we performed a meta-analysis of 13 inflammatory bowel 
disease studies, measuring effects of disease and sample type. Crohn’s disease 
studies were more heterogeneous than ulcerative colitis studies, and sample type 
variation was a major contributor to inconsistency.

© 2022 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izac194
PMCID: PMC9825291
PMID: 36112501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Microbiome. 2022 Aug 24;10(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s40168-022-01331-x.

Location-specific signatures of Crohn's disease at a multi-omics scale.

Gonzalez CG(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Mills RH(1)(2)(3)(4), Zhu Q(7)(8), Sauceda 
C(1)(3)(4), Knight R(2)(4)(5)(6), Dulai PS(9), Gonzalez DJ(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, 92093, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
92093, USA.
(3)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA.
(4)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, 92093, USA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, 92093, USA.
(6)Department of Computer Science & Engineering, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA.
(7)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(8)Biodesign Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Arizona State 
University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(9)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Feinberg 
School of Medicine Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, 60061, USA. 
parambir.dulai@northwestern.edu.
(10)Department of Pharmacology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
CA, 92093, USA. djgonzalez@health.ucsd.edu.
(11)School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, CA, 92093, USA. djgonzalez@health.ucsd.edu.
(12)Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San Diego, San 
Diego, CA, 92093, USA. djgonzalez@health.ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: Crohn's disease (CD), an inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) subtype, 
results from pathologic interactions between host cells and its resident gut 
microbes. CD manifests in both isolated disease locations (ileum or colon) or a 
combination of locations (ileocolonic). To date, a comprehensive understanding 
of how isolated CD subtypes influence molecular profiles remains outstanding. To 
address this, we sought to define CD location signatures by leveraging a large 
cross-sectional feature set captured from the stool of over 200 IBD patients and 
healthy controls using metaproteomics, shotgun metagenomics, 16S rRNA 
sequencing, metabolomic profiling, and host genetics paired with clinical 
endoscopic assessments.
RESULTS: Neither metagenomic nor host genetics alone distinguished CD location 
subtypes. In contrast, ileal and colonic CD were distinguished using mass 
spectrometry-based methods (metabolomics or metaproteomics) or a combined 
multi-omic feature set. This multi-omic feature set revealed colonic CD was 
strongly associated with neutrophil-related proteins. Additionally, colonic CD 
displayed a disease-severity-related association with Bacteroides vulgatus. 
Colonic CD and ulcerative colitis profiles harbored strikingly similar feature 
enrichments compared to ileal CD, including neutrophil-related protein 
enrichments. Compared to colonic CD, ileal CD profiles displayed increased 
primary and secondary bile acid levels and concomitant shifts in taxa with noted 
sensitivities such as Faecalibacterium prausnitzii or affinities for bile 
acid-rich environments, including Gammaproteobacteria and Blautia sp. Having 
shown robust molecular and microbial distinctions tied to CD locations, we 
leveraged these profiles to generate location-specific disease severity 
biomarkers that surpass the performance of Calprotectin.
CONCLUSIONS: When compared using multi-omics features, colonic- and 
ileal-isolated CD subtypes display striking differences that suggest separate 
location-specific pathologies. Colonic CD's strong similarity to ulcerative 
colitis, including neutrophil and Bacteroides vulgatus involvement, is also 
evidence of a shared pathology for colonic-isolated IBD subtypes, while ileal CD 
maintains a unique, bile acid-driven profile. More broadly, this study 
demonstrates the power of multi-omics approaches for IBD biomarker discovery and 
elucidating the underlying biology. Video Abstract.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-022-01331-x
PMCID: PMC9400277
PMID: 35999575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Jul 15;12:934619. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.934619. eCollection 2022.

Microenvironmental Factors that Shape Bacterial Metabolites in Inflammatory 
Bowel Disease.

Lopez LR(1), Ahn JH(1), Alves T(2), Arthur JC(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(2)Division of Comprehensive Oral Health, Adams School of Dentistry, The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(3)Center for Gastrointestinal Biology and Disease, The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(4)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a significant global health problem that 
involves chronic intestinal inflammation and can involve severe comorbidities, 
including intestinal fibrosis and inflammation-associated colorectal cancer 
(CRC). Disease-associated alterations to the intestinal microbiota often include 
fecal enrichment of Enterobacteriaceae, which are strongly implicated in IBD 
development. This dysbiosis of intestinal flora accompanies changes in microbial 
metabolites, shaping host:microbe interactions and disease risk. While there 
have been numerous studies linking specific bacterial taxa with IBD development, 
our understanding of microbial function in the context of IBD is limited. 
Several classes of microbial metabolites have been directly implicated in IBD 
disease progression, including bacterial siderophores and genotoxins. Yet, our 
microbiota still harbors thousands of uncharacterized microbial products. 
In-depth discovery and characterization of disease-associated microbial 
metabolites is necessary to target these products in IBD treatment strategies. 
Towards improving our understanding of microbiota metabolites in IBD, it is 
important to recognize how host relevant factors influence microbiota function. 
For example, changes in host inflammation status, metal availability, 
interbacterial community structure, and xenobiotics all play an important role 
in shaping gut microbial ecology. In this minireview, we outline how each of 
these factors influences gut microbial function, with a specific focus on 
IBD-associated Enterobacteriaceae metabolites. Importantly, we discuss how 
altering the intestinal microenvironment could improve the treatment of 
intestinal inflammation and associated disorders, like intestinal fibrosis and 
CRC.

Copyright © 2022 Lopez, Ahn, Alves and Arthur.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.934619
PMCID: PMC9362432
PMID: 35959366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Microbiome. 2022 Aug 5;10(1):121. doi: 10.1186/s40168-022-01310-2.

Microbial risk score for capturing microbial characteristics, integrating 
multi-omics data, and predicting disease risk.

Wang C(1), Segal LN(2), Hu J(1), Zhou B(1), Hayes RB(3), Ahn J(3), Li H(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Population Health, New York 
University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, New York University 
Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10017, USA.
(3)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Population Health, New York 
University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Population Health, New York 
University Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, 10016, USA. 
Huilin.Li@nyulangone.org.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2022 Jun 08:2022.06.07.495127. doi: 10.1101/2022.06.07.495127.

BACKGROUND: With the rapid accumulation of microbiome-wide association studies, 
a great amount of microbiome data are available to study the microbiome's role 
in human disease and advance the microbiome's potential use for disease 
prediction. However, the unique features of microbiome data hinder its utility 
for disease prediction.
METHODS: Motivated from the polygenic risk score framework, we propose a 
microbial risk score (MRS) framework to aggregate the complicated microbial 
profile into a summarized risk score that can be used to measure and predict 
disease susceptibility. Specifically, the MRS algorithm involves two steps: (1) 
identifying a sub-community consisting of the signature microbial taxa 
associated with disease and (2) integrating the identified microbial taxa into a 
continuous score. The first step is carried out using the existing sophisticated 
microbial association tests and pruning and thresholding method in the discovery 
samples. The second step constructs a community-based MRS by calculating alpha 
diversity on the identified sub-community in the validation samples. Moreover, 
we propose a multi-omics data integration method by jointly modeling the 
proposed MRS and other risk scores constructed from other omics data in disease 
prediction.
RESULTS: Through three comprehensive real-data analyses using the NYU Langone 
Health COVID-19 cohort, the gut microbiome health index (GMHI) multi-study 
cohort, and a large type 1 diabetes cohort separately, we exhibit and evaluate 
the utility of the proposed MRS framework for disease prediction and multi-omics 
data integration. In addition, the disease-specific MRSs for colorectal adenoma, 
colorectal cancer, Crohn's disease, and rheumatoid arthritis based on the 
relative abundances of 5, 6, 12, and 6 microbial taxa, respectively, are created 
and validated using the GMHI multi-study cohort. Especially, Crohn's disease MRS 
achieves AUCs of 0.88 (0.85-0.91) and 0.86 (0.78-0.95) in the discovery and 
validation cohorts, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed MRS framework sheds light on the utility of the 
microbiome data for disease prediction and multi-omics integration and provides 
a great potential in understanding the microbiome's role in disease diagnosis 
and prognosis. Video Abstract.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-022-01310-2
PMCID: PMC9354433
PMID: 35932029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Gut Microbiome (Camb). 2022 Aug 4;3:e8. doi: 10.1017/gmb.2022.7. eCollection 
2022.

The microbiome in adult acute appendicitis.

Lee MS(1)(2), Sulit A(1)(3), Frizelle F(1)(2), Purcell R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(3)Massey University, Auckland, New Zealand.

Acute appendicitis is a common acute surgical emergency; however, the 
pathogenesis of adult appendicitis remains poorly understood. The microbiome is 
increasingly thought to play a key role in inflammatory disease of the bowel and 
similarly, may play a role in appendicitis. This study aimed to characterise the 
microbiome of adult acute appendicitis in a prospective cohort. We recruited 60 
adults with acute appendicitis and 20 healthy controls. Rectal swabs were taken 
from each patient. After DNA extraction, 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing was 
carried out for analysis of diversity and taxonomic abundance. Phylogenetic 
sequencing of the samples indicated that there is a difference between the 
microbial composition of those with acute appendicitis and healthy controls, 
with a statistically significant decrease in alpha diversity in rectal swabs of 
appendicitis patients compared to healthy controls. At the genus level, we saw 
an increased abundance of potential pathogens, for example, Parvimonas and 
Acinetobacter, and a decrease in commensal taxa such as Faecalibacterium, 
Blautia and Lachnospiraceae in appendicitis patients compared to healthy 
controls. There was a reduction in diversity and loss of commensals in the 
microbiome of those with acute appendicitis, which may play a role in the 
cascade leading to acute appendicitis or the result of this.

© The Author(s) 2022.

DOI: 10.1017/gmb.2022.7
PMCID: PMC11406380
PMID: 39295777

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no known conflicts of interest 
to report.

1. Microorganisms. 2022 Jul 20;10(7):1467. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms10071467.

The Common and Unique Pattern of Microbiome Profiles among Saliva, Tissue, and 
Stool Samples in Patients with Crohn's Disease.

Shin SY(1), Kim S(2)(3), Choi JW(2)(4), Kang SB(5), Kim TO(6), Seo GS(7), Cha 
JM(8), Chun J(9), Jung Y(10), Im JP(11), Bang KB(12), Choi CH(1), Park 
SK(13)(14), Park DI(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul 06973, Korea.
(2)Functional Genome Institute, PDXen Biosystems, Co., Suwon 16488, Korea.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Ulsan National Institute of Science and 
Technology, Ulsan 44919, Korea.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, 
Korea.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, The Catholic 
University of Korea College of Medicine, Daejeon 34943, Korea.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University 
College of Medicine, Busan 48108, Korea.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology and Digestive Disease Research Institute, 
Wonkwang University School of Medicine, Iksan 54538, Korea.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gang Dong, 
Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul 05278, Korea.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei 
University College of Medicine, Seoul 06273, Korea.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Soonchunhyang 
University College of Medicine, Cheonan 31151, Korea.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine and Liver Research Institute, College of 
Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Dankook University College of Medicine, 
Cheonan 31116, Korea.
(13)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine and 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease Cencer, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul 03181, Korea.
(14)Medical Research Institute, Kangbuk Samsung Hospital, Sungkyunkwan 
University School of Medicine, Seoul 03181, Korea.

This study aimed to elucidate common and unique microbiome patterns in saliva, 
intestinal tissue biopsy, and stool samples from patients with Crohn's disease 
(CD). Saliva, tissue, and stool samples from patients with CD were prospectively 
collected. Quantitative and phylogenetic analyses of 16s rRNA sequencing data 
were performed with bioinformatical pipelines. A total of 30 patients were 
enrolled in this study. The composition of major microbial taxa was similar 
between tissue and stool samples. A total of 11 of the 20 most abundant 
microbiota were found in both samples. The microbial community in saliva was 
significantly distinct from that in tissue and stool. The major species of 
microbiota and their composition also differed significantly from those of 
tissue and stool samples. However, Streptococcus and Prevotella are common 
genera in saliva, tissue, and stool microbiome. The abundance of Streptococcus, 
Pantoea, and Actinomyces from the saliva sample group were significantly 
different, varying with the location of the inflammation. Saliva has a distinct 
microbial community compared with tissues and stools in patients with CD. 
Prevotella and Streptococcus, which are commonly observed in saliva, stool, and 
tissue, can be considered a potential biomarker related to the diagnosis or 
prognosis of CD.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms10071467
PMCID: PMC9320459
PMID: 35889187

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Elife. 2022 Jul 19;11:e75419. doi: 10.7554/eLife.75419.

Key features of the genetic architecture and evolution of host-microbe 
interactions revealed by high-resolution genetic mapping of the 
mucosa-associated gut microbiome in hybrid mice.

Doms S(1)(2), Fokt H(1)(2), Rühlemann MC(3)(4), Chung CJ(1)(2), Kuenstner A(5), 
Ibrahim SM(5)(6), Franke A(3), Turner LM(#)(7), Baines JF(#)(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, Plön, Germany.
(2)Section of Evolutionary Medicine, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Kiel 
University, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology (IKMB), Kiel University, Kiel, 
Germany.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hospital Epidemiology, Hannover 
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Institute of Experimental Dermatology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(6)Sharjah Institute of Medical Research, Sharjah, United Arab Emirates.
(7)Milner Centre for Evolution, Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University 
of Bath, Bath, United Kingdom.
(#)Contributed equally

Determining the forces that shape diversity in host-associated bacterial 
communities is critical to understanding the evolution and maintenance of 
metaorganisms. To gain deeper understanding of the role of host genetics in 
shaping gut microbial traits, we employed a powerful genetic mapping approach 
using inbred lines derived from the hybrid zone of two incipient house mouse 
species. Furthermore, we uniquely performed our analysis on microbial traits 
measured at the gut mucosal interface, which is in more direct contact with host 
cells and the immune system. Several mucosa-associated bacterial taxa have high 
heritability estimates, and interestingly, 16S rRNA transcript-based 
heritability estimates are positively correlated with cospeciation rate 
estimates. Genome-wide association mapping identifies 428 loci influencing 120 
taxa, with narrow genomic intervals pinpointing promising candidate genes and 
pathways. Importantly, we identified an enrichment of candidate genes associated 
with several human diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, and 
functional categories including innate immunity and G-protein-coupled receptors. 
These results highlight key features of the genetic architecture of mammalian 
host-microbe interactions and how they diverge as new species form.

Plain Language Summary: The digestive system, particularly the large intestine, 
hosts many types of bacteria which together form the gut microbiome. The exact 
makeup of different bacterial species is specific to an individual, but 
microbiomes are often more similar between related individuals, and more 
generally, across related species. Whether this is because individuals share 
similar environments or similar genetic backgrounds remains unclear. These two 
factors can be disentangled by breeding different animal lineages – which have 
different genetic backgrounds while belonging to the same species – and then 
raising the progeny in the same environment. To investigate this question, Doms 
et al. studied the genes and microbiomes of mice resulting from breeding strains 
from multiple locations in a natural hybrid zone between different subspecies. 
The experiments showed that 428 genetic regions affected the makeup of the 
microbiome, many of which were known to be associated with human diseases. 
Further analysis revealed 79 genes that were particularly interesting, as they 
were involved in recognition and communication with bacteria. These results show 
how the influence of the host genome on microbiome composition becomes more 
specialized as animals evolve. Overall, the work by Doms et al. helps to 
pinpoint the genes that impact the microbiome; this knowledge could be helpful 
to examine how these interactions contribute to the emergence of conditions such 
as diabetes or inflammatory bowel disease, which are linked to perturbations in 
gut bacteria.

© 2022, Doms et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.75419
PMCID: PMC9307277
PMID: 35866635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SD, HF, MR, CC, AK, SI, AF, LT, JB No competing 
interests declared

1. Gastroenterology. 2022 Nov;163(5):1364-1376.e10. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2022.07.004. Epub 2022 Jul 16.

Altered Gut Microbiome Composition and Function Are Associated With Gut Barrier 
Dysfunction in Healthy Relatives of Patients With Crohn's Disease.

Leibovitzh H(1), Lee SH(1), Xue M(2), Raygoza Garay JA(1), Hernandez-Rocha C(1), 
Madsen KL(3), Meddings JB(4), Guttman DS(5), Espin-Garcia O(6), Smith MI(2), 
Goethel A(2), Griffiths AM(7), Moayyedi P(8), Steinhart AH(1), Panaccione R(9), 
Huynh HQ(10), Jacobson K(11), Aumais G(12), Mack DR(13), Abreu MT(14), Bernstein 
CN(15), Marshall JK(8), Turner D(16), Xu W(6); CCC GEM Project Research 
Consortium; Turpin W(1), Croitoru K(17).

Author information:
(1)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Temerty Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(3)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, Cumming School of Medicine, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Centre for the Analysis of Genome Evolution & Function, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(7)IBD Center, The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Paediatrics, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Farncombe Family Digestive 
Health Research Institute, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Clinic, Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, 
Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada.
(11)Canadian Gastro-Intestinal Epidemiology Consortium, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; British Columbia Children's Hospital, British Columbia Children's 
Hospital Research Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(12)Department of Medicine, Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montreal University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(13)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario and University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(14)Division of Gastroenterology, Crohn's and Colitis Center, Department of 
Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(15)University of Manitoba Inflammatory Bowel Disease Clinical and Research 
Centre and Department of Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(16)The Juliet Keidan Institute of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, 
Shaare Zedek Medical Center, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(17)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Temerty Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: 
ken.croitoru@sinaihealth.ca.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2023 May;164(6):1024-1025. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2022.12.011.
    Gastroenterology. 2023 May;164(6):1025-1026. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2022.12.010.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The gut microbiome has been suggested to play a role in gut 
barrier hemostasis, but data are scarce and limited to animal studies. We 
therefore aimed to assess whether alterations in gut microbial composition and 
functional pathways are associated with gut barrier function in a cohort of 
healthy first-degree relatives of patients with Crohn's disease.
METHODS: We used the Crohn's and Colitis Canada Genetic Environmental Microbial 
(CCC-GEM) cohort of healthy first-degree relatives of patients with Crohn's 
disease. Gut barrier function was assessed using the urinary fractional 
excretion of lactulose-to-mannitol ratio (LMR). Microbiome composition was 
assessed by sequencing fecal 16S ribosomal RNA. The cohort was divided into a 
discovery cohort (n = 2472) and a validation cohort (n = 655). A regression 
model was used to assess microbial associations with the LMR. A random forest 
classifier algorithm was performed to assess microbial community contribution to 
barrier function.
RESULTS: Individuals with impaired barrier function (LMR >0.025) had reduced 
alpha-diversity (Chao1 index, P = 4.0e-4) and altered beta-diversity 
(Bray-Curtis dissimilarity index, R2 = 0.001, P = 1.0e-3) compared with 
individuals with an LMR ≤0.025. When taxa were assessed individually, we 
identified 8 genera and 52 microbial pathways associated with an LMR >0.025 (q < 
0.05). Four genera (decreased prevalence of Adlercreutzia, Clostridia UCG 014, 
and Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and increased abundance of Colidextribacter) and 
8 pathways (including decreased biosynthesis of glutamate, tryptophan, and 
threonine) were replicated in the validation cohort. The random forest approach 
revealed that the bacterial community is associated with gut barrier function 
(area under the curve, 0.63; P = 1.4e-6).
CONCLUSIONS: The gut microbiome community and pathways are associated with 
changes in gut barrier function. These findings may identify potential microbial 
targets to modulate gut barrier.

Copyright © 2022 AGA Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.07.004
PMID: 35850197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Front Microbiol. 2022 Jun 17;13:883991. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.883991. 
eCollection 2022.

Cow Farmers' Homes Host More Diverse Airborne Bacterial Communities Than Pig 
Farmers' Homes and Suburban Homes.

Amin H(1), Šantl-Temkiv T(2), Cramer C(3)(4), Vestergaard DV(2)(3), Holst GJ(3), 
Elholm G(3), Finster K(2), Bertelsen RJ(1), Schlünssen V(3)(5), Sigsgaard T(3), 
Marshall IPG(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)Section for Microbiology, Department of Biology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(3)Department of Public Health, Environment, Work, and Health, Danish Ramazzini 
Center, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Department of Occupational Medicine, Danish Ramazzini Center, Aarhus 
University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)The National Research Center for the Working Environment, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

Living on a farm has been linked to a lower risk of immunoregulatory disorders, 
such as asthma, allergy, and inflammatory bowel disease. It is hypothesized that 
a decrease in the diversity and composition of indoor microbial communities is a 
sensible explanation for the upsurge in immunoregulatory diseases, with airborne 
bacteria contributing to this protective effect. However, the composition of 
this potentially beneficial microbial community in various farm and suburban 
indoor environments is still to be characterized. We collected settled airborne 
dust from stables and the associated farmers' homes and from suburban homes 
using electrostatic dust collectors (EDCs) over a period of 14 days. Then, 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) was used to assess bacterial abundance. The V3-V4 region 
of the bacterial 16S rRNA gene was amplified and sequenced using Ilumina MiSeq 
in order to assess microbial diversity. The Divisive Amplicon Denoising 
Algorithm (DADA2) algorithm was used for the inference of amplicon sequence 
variants from amplicon data. Airborne bacteria were significantly more abundant 
in farmers' indoor environments than in suburban homes (p < 0.001). Cow farmers' 
homes had significantly higher bacterial diversity than pig farmers' and 
suburban homes (p < 0.001). Bacterial taxa, such as Firmicutes, Prevotellaceae, 
Lachnospiraceae, and Lactobacillus were significantly more abundant in farmers' 
homes than suburban homes, and the same was true for beneficial intestinal 
bacterial species, such as Lactobacillus amylovorus, Eubacterium hallii, and 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii. Furthermore, we found a higher similarity between 
bacterial communities in individual farmers' homes and their associated cow 
stables than for pig stables. Our findings contribute with important knowledge 
on bacterial composition, abundance, and diversity in different environments, 
which is highly valuable in the discussion on how microbial exposure may 
contribute to the development of immune-mediated diseases in both children and 
adults.

Copyright © 2022 Amin, Šantl-Temkiv, Cramer, Vestergaard, Holst, Elholm, 
Finster, Bertelsen, Schlünssen, Sigsgaard and Marshall.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.883991
PMCID: PMC9278274
PMID: 35847077

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Microbiome. 2022 Jul 8;10(1):105. doi: 10.1186/s40168-022-01275-2.

Transplantation of bacteriophages from ulcerative colitis patients shifts the 
gut bacteriome and exacerbates the severity of DSS colitis.

Sinha A(#)(1), Li Y(#)(1)(2), Mirzaei MK(1)(3), Shamash M(1), Samadfam R(4), 
King IL(5)(6), Maurice CF(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Guangdong Provincial Key 
Laboratory of Diabetology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510630, Guangdong, China.
(3)Institute of Virology, Helmholtz Center Munich and Technical University of 
Munich, 85764, Neuherberg, Bavaria, Germany.
(4)Charles River Laboratories, 22022 Transcanadienne, Senneville, QC, H9X 3R3, 
Canada.
(5)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada. irah.king@mcgill.ca.
(6)McGill Interdisciplinary Initiative in Infection and Immunity, Montreal, QC, 
Canada. irah.king@mcgill.ca.
(7)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, 
Canada. corinne.maurice@mcgill.ca.
(8)McGill Interdisciplinary Initiative in Infection and Immunity, Montreal, QC, 
Canada. corinne.maurice@mcgill.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) including Crohn's disease (CD) 
and ulcerative colitis (UC) are characterized by chronic and debilitating gut 
inflammation. Altered bacterial communities of the intestine are strongly 
associated with IBD initiation and progression. The gut virome, which is 
primarily composed of bacterial viruses (bacteriophages, phages), is thought to 
be an important factor regulating and shaping microbial communities in the gut. 
While alterations in the gut virome have been observed in IBD patients, the 
contribution of these viruses to alterations in the bacterial community and 
heightened inflammatory responses associated with IBD patients remains largely 
unknown.
RESULTS: Here, we performed in vivo microbial cross-infection experiments to 
follow the effects of fecal virus-like particles (VLPs) isolated from UC 
patients and healthy controls on bacterial diversity and severity of 
experimental colitis in human microbiota-associated (HMA) mice. Shotgun 
metagenomics confirmed that several phages were transferred to HMA mice, 
resulting in treatment-specific alterations in the gut virome. VLPs from healthy 
and UC patients also shifted gut bacterial diversity of these mice, an effect 
that was amplified during experimental colitis. VLPs isolated from UC patients 
specifically altered the relative abundance of several bacterial taxa previously 
implicated in IBD progression. Additionally, UC VLP administration heightened 
colitis severity in HMA mice, as indicated by shortened colon length and 
increased pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Importantly, this effect was 
dependent on intact VLPs.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings build on recent literature indicating that phages are 
dynamic regulators of bacterial communities in the gut and implicate the 
intestinal virome in modulating intestinal inflammation and disease. Video 
Abstract.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-022-01275-2
PMCID: PMC9264660
PMID: 35799219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2022 Jul 7;24(1):163. doi: 10.1186/s13075-022-02853-3.

Distinctive gut microbiomes of ankylosing spondylitis and inflammatory bowel 
disease patients suggest differing roles in pathogenesis and correlate with 
disease activity.

Sternes PR(1), Brett L(2), Phipps J(3), Ciccia F(4), Kenna T(5)(6), de Guzman 
E(5)(3), Zimmermann K(6), Morrison M(7), Holtmann G(8), Klingberg E(9), Mauro 
D(4), McIvor C(2), Forsblad-d'Elia H(9), Brown MA(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Microbiome Research, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia. peter.sternes@qut.edu.au.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Logan Hospital, Logan, Australia.
(3)School of Biomedical Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Precision Medicine, Università della Campania L. Vanvitelli, 
Naples, Italy.
(5)Centre for Microbiome Research, Queensland University of Technology, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(6)Centre for Immunology and Infection Control, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(8)Faculty of Health and Behavioural Sciences, University of Queensland, 
Brisbane, Australia.
(9)Department of Rheumatology and Inflammation Research, Sahlgrenska Academy at 
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(10)Genomics England, London, UK.
(11)Faculty of Life Sciences and Medicine, King's College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Multiple studies have confirmed dysbiosis in ankylosing spondylitis 
(AS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); however, due to methodological 
differences across studies, it has not been possible to determine if these 
diseases have similar or different gut microbiomes.
RESULTS: In this study, faecal and intestinal biopsies were obtained from 33 
Australian AS patients (including 5 with concomitant IBD, 'AS-IBD'), 59 IBD 
patients and 105 healthy controls. Stool samples were also obtained from 16 
Italian AS patients and 136 Swedish AS patients. Focusing on the Australian 
cohort, AS, AS-IBD and IBD patients differed from one another and from healthy 
controls in both alpha and beta diversity. AS patients with and without clinical 
IBD could be distinguished from one another with moderate accuracy using stool 
microbiome (AUC=0.754). Stool microbiome also accurately distinguished IBD 
patients from healthy controls (AUC=0.757). Microbiome composition was 
correlated with disease activity measured by BASDAI and faecal calprotectin 
(FCP) levels. Enrichment of potentially pathogenic Streptococcus was noted in 
AS, AS-IBD and IBD patients. Furthermore, enrichment of another potentially 
pathogenic genus, Haemophilus, was observed in AS, AS-IBD, IBD, AS patients with 
increased BASDAI, and IBD patients with faecal calprotectin >100 μg/mg. Apart 
from these genera, no other taxa were shared between AS and IBD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, the distinct gut microbiome of AS and AS-IBD 
patients compared to IBD patients and healthy controls is consistent with 
immunological and genetic evidence suggesting that the gut plays a different 
role in driving AS compared with IBD. However, enrichment of two potentially 
pathogenic genera in both diseases suggests that the presence of a shared/common 
microbial trigger of disease cannot be discounted.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-022-02853-3
PMCID: PMC9261041
PMID: 35794662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 May 26;9:773105. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.773105. 
eCollection 2022.

Features of Gut Microbiome Associated With Responses to Fecal Microbiota 
Transplantation for Inflammatory Bowel Disease: A Systematic Review.

Zhang J(1), Guo Y(2), Duan L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Department of Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, China.

Fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has been seen as a novel treatment for 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The results on microbial alterations and their 
relationship to treatment efficacy are varied among studies. We performed a 
systematic review to explore the association between microbial features and 
therapy outcomes. We searched PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, and Cochrane 
Library databases from inception to November 2020. Studies that investigated the 
efficacy of FMT and baseline microbial features or dynamic alteration of the 
microbiome during FMT were included. The methodological quality of the included 
cohort studies and randomized controlled trials (RCTs) was assessed using the 
Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) and the Cochrane risk of bias tool, respectively. A 
total of 30 studies were included in the analysis. Compared to non-responders, 
the microbial structure of patients who responded to FMT had a higher similarity 
to that of their donors after FMT. Donors of responders (R-d) and non-responders 
(NR-d) had different microbial taxa, but the results were inconsistent. After 
FMT, several beneficial short-chain fatty acids- (SCFA-) producing taxa, such as 
Faecalibacterium, Eubacterium, Roseburia, and species belonging to them, were 
enriched in responders, while pathogenic bacteria (Escherichia coli and 
Escherichia-Shigella) belonging to the phylum Proteobacteria were decreased. 
Alterations of microbial functional genes and metabolites were also observed. In 
conclusion, the response to FMT was associated with the gut microbiota and their 
metabolites. The pre-FMT microbial features of recipients, the comparison of 
pre- and post-FMT microbiota, and the relationship between recipients and donors 
at baseline should be further investigated using uniform and standardized 
methods.

Copyright © 2022 Zhang, Guo and Duan.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.773105
PMCID: PMC9198717
PMID: 35721102

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. EBioMedicine. 2022 Jul;81:104088. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104088. Epub 2022 
May 31.

Systematic review of donor and recipient predictive biomarkers of response to 
faecal microbiota transplantation in patients with ulcerative colitis.

Rees NP(1), Shaheen W(1), Quince C(2), Tselepis C(3), Horniblow RD(3), Sharma 
N(4), Beggs AD(4), Iqbal TH(5), Quraishi MN(6).

Author information:
(1)University of Birmingham Microbiome Treatment Centre, Birmingham, UK; 
Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK.
(2)Earlham Institute, Norwich, UK.
(3)University of Birmingham Microbiome Treatment Centre, Birmingham, UK; 
Institute of Clinical Sciences, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Birmingham, UK.
(4)University of Birmingham Microbiome Treatment Centre, Birmingham, UK; 
Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK; 
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(5)University of Birmingham Microbiome Treatment Centre, Birmingham, UK; 
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK; Institute 
of Microbiology and Infection, University of Birmingham, UK.
(6)University of Birmingham Microbiome Treatment Centre, Birmingham, UK; 
Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, UK; 
University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK. Electronic 
address: nabil.quraishi@nhs.net.

BACKGROUND: Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has previously been explored 
as a treatment for ulcerative colitis (UC) however, biomarkers that predict and 
/ or are associated with clinical response are poorly defined. The aim of this 
systematic review was to identify donor and recipient clinical, microbial and 
metabolomic predictive biomarkers of response to FMT in UC.
METHODS: A systematic search of the relevant literature of studies exploring FMT 
in UC was conducted. Data on microbial diversity, taxonomic changes, metabolic 
changes, donor and recipient microbiota relationship and baseline predictors was 
examined.
FINDINGS: 2852 studies were screened, and 25 papers were included in this 
systematic review. Following FMT, alpha diversity was seen to increase in 
responders along with increases in the abundance of Clostridiales clusters 
(order) and Bacteroides genus. Metabolomic analysis revealed short chain fatty 
acid (SCFA) production as a marker of FMT success. Donors or FMT batches with 
higher microbial alpha diversity and a greater abundance of taxa belonging to 
certain Bacteroides and Clostridia clusters were associated with clinical 
response to FMT. Baseline clinical predictors of response in patients with UC 
included younger age, less severe disease and possibly shorter disease duration. 
Baseline recipient microbial predictors at response consisted of higher faecal 
species richness, greater abundance of Candida and donor microbial profile 
similarity.
INTERPRETATION: Distinct changes in gut microbiota profiles post-FMT indicate 
that certain baseline characteristics along with specific microbial and 
metabolomic alterations may predispose patients towards a successful therapeutic 
outcome. Opportunities towards a biomarker led precision medicine approach with 
FMT should be explored in future clinical studies.
FUNDING: There no specific funding to declare.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2022.104088
PMCID: PMC9163485
PMID: 35660786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests All authors declare no 
relevant conflict of interests.

1. Gastroenterology. 2022 Sep;163(3):685-698. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.05.037. 
Epub 2022 May 26.

Mediterranean-Like Dietary Pattern Associations With Gut Microbiome Composition 
and Subclinical Gastrointestinal Inflammation.

Turpin W(1), Dong M(2), Sasson G(1), Raygoza Garay JA(3), Espin-Garcia O(4), Lee 
SH(3), Neustaeter A(1), Smith MI(1), Leibovitzh H(1), Guttman DS(5), Goethel 
A(1), Griffiths AM(6), Huynh HQ(7), Dieleman LA(8), Panaccione R(9), Steinhart 
AH(10), Silverberg MS(1), Aumais G(11), Jacobson K(12), Mack D(13), Murthy 
SK(14), Marshall JK(15), Bernstein CN(16), Abreu MT(17), Moayyedi P(15), 
Paterson AD(18); Crohn’s and Colitis Canada (CCC) Genetic, Environmental, 
Microbial (GEM) Project Research Consortium; Xu W(4), Croitoru K(19).

Collaborators: Abreu M, Beck P, Bernstein C, Croitoru K, Dieleman L, Feagan B, 
Griffiths A, Guttman D, Jacobson K, Kaplan G, Krause DO, Madsen K, Marshall J, 
Moayyedi P, Ropeleski M, Seidman E, Silverberg M, Snapper S, Stadnyk A, 
Steinhart H, Surette M, Turner D, Walters T, Vallance B, Aumais G, Bitton A, 
Cino M, Critch J, Denson L, Deslandres C, El-Matary W, Herfarth H, Higgins P, 
Huynh H, Hyams J, Mack D, McGrath J, Otley A, Panancionne R, Aumais G, 
Baldassano R, Bernstein C, Denson L, Deslandres C, El-Matary W, Griffiths AM, 
Hedin C, Herfarth H, Higgins P, Hussey S, Hyams H, Jacobson K, Keljo D, Kevans 
D, Lees C, Mack D, Marshall J, McGrath J, Murthy S, Otley A, Panaccione R, 
Parekh N, Plamondon S, Radford-Smith G, Ropeleski M, Rosh J, Rubin D, Schultz M, 
Seidman E, Siegel C, Snapper S, Steinhart H, Turner D.

Author information:
(1)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(4)Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, and Department of Biostatistics, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, 
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Cell & Systems Biology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Centre for the Analysis of Genome Evolution & Function, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Division of Gastroenterology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(8)Division of Gastroenterology and the Centre of Excellence for 
Gastrointestinal Inflammation and Immunity Research (CEGIIR), Department of 
Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
(9)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Clinic, Division of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(10)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Division of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, 
University of Toronto, and Department of Biostatistics, Princess Margaret Cancer 
Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(11)Department of Medicine, Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont, Montreal University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(12)Canadian Gastro-Intestinal Epidemiology Consortium (CanGIEC); British 
Columbia Children's Hospital Research Institute, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(13)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Children's Hospital of 
Eastern Ontario and University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(14)The Ottawa Hospital Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centre, Department of 
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(15)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Farncombe Family Digestive 
Health Research Institute, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(16)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Clinical and Research Centre, and Department of 
Internal Medicine, Max Rady College of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.
(17)Department of Medicine, Crohn's and Colitis Center, University of Miami 
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(18)Department of Biostatistics, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Genetics and Genome Biology, The Hospital 
for Sick Children Research Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(19)Zane Cohen Centre for Digestive Diseases, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: ken.croitoru@sinaihealth.ca.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2023 Mar;164(3):500-501. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2022.06.050.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Case-control studies have shown that patients with Crohn's 
disease (CD) have a microbial composition different from healthy individuals. 
Although the causes of CD are unknown, epidemiologic studies suggest that diet 
is an important contributor to CD risk, potentially via modulation of bacterial 
composition and gut inflammation. We hypothesized that long-term dietary 
clusters (DCs) are associated with gut microbiome compositions and gut 
inflammation. Our objectives were to identify dietary patterns and assess 
whether they are associated with alterations in specific gut microbial 
compositions and subclinical levels of gut inflammation in a cohort of healthy 
first-degree relatives (FDRs) of patients with CD.
METHODS: As part of the Genetic, Environmental, Microbial (GEM) Project, we 
recruited a cohort of 2289 healthy FDRs of patients with CD. Individuals 
provided stool samples and answered a validated food frequency questionnaire 
reflecting their habitual diet during the year before sample collection. 
Unsupervised analysis identified 3 dietary and 3 microbial composition clusters.
RESULTS: DC3, resembling the Mediterranean diet, was strongly associated with a 
defined microbial composition, with an increased abundance of fiber-degrading 
bacteria, such as Ruminococcus, as well as taxa such as Faecalibacterium. The 
DC3 diet was also significantly associated with lower levels of subclinical gut 
inflammation, defined by fecal calprotectin, compared with other dietary 
patterns. No significant associations were found between individual food items 
and fecal calprotectin, suggesting that long-term dietary patterns rather than 
individual food items contribute to subclinical gut inflammation. Additionally, 
mediation analysis demonstrated that DC3 had a direct effect on subclinical 
inflammation that was partially mediated by the microbiota.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results indicated that Mediterranean-like dietary 
patterns are associated with microbiome and lower intestinal inflammation. This 
study will help guide future dietary strategies that affect microbial 
composition and host gut inflammation to prevent diseases.

Copyright © 2022 AGA Institute. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2022.05.037
PMID: 35643175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2022;14(1):35-53. doi: 
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2022.03.008. Epub 2022 Apr 1.

The Host-Microbiome Response to Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy in Ulcerative Colitis 
Patients.

Gonzalez CG(1), Mills RH(1), Kordahi MC(2), Carrillo-Terrazas M(3), 
Secaira-Morocho H(4), Widjaja CE(5), Tsai MS(5), Mittal Y(5), Yee BA(6), Vargas 
F(7), Weldon K(8), Gauglitz JM(9), Delaroque C(2), Sauceda C(10), Rossitto 
LA(10), Ackermann G(9), Humphrey G(9), Swafford AD(11), Siegel CA(12), Buckey JC 
Jr(13), Raffals LE(14), Sadler C(15), Lindholm P(15), Fisch KM(16), Valaseck 
M(17), Suriawinata A(12), Yeo GW(6), Ghosh P(18), Chang JT(5), Chu H(19), 
Dorrestein P(20), Zhu Q(4), Chassaing B(2), Knight R(21), Gonzalez DJ(22), Dulai 
PS(23).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, California; 
Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, 
San Diego, California; Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San 
Diego, California.
(2)INSERM U1016, team "Mucosal microbiota in chronic inflammatory diseases", 
CNRS UMR 8104, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, California; 
Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, 
San Diego, California.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona; Biodesign 
Center for Fundamental and Applied Microbiomics, Arizona State University, 
Tempe, Arizona.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
California.
(6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, California; Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(7)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, California.
(8)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, California; Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, California.
(10)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, California.
(11)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, California.
(12)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical 
Center, Lebanon, New Hampshire.
(13)Center for Hyperbaric Medicine, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical Center, Lebanon, 
New Hampshire.
(14)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(15)Division of Hyperbaric Medicine, Department of Emergency Medicine, 
University of California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(16)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(17)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
California.
(18)Division of Gastroenterology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
California; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(19)Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
California; Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, California; Chiba University-UC San Diego Center for Mucosal 
Immunology, Allergy and Vaccines (cMAV), University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, California.
(20)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
California, San Diego, California; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Diego, California; Center for Microbiome Innovation, University 
of California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(21)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of California San 
Diego, San Diego, California; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
California, San Diego, California; Center for Microbiome Innovation, University 
of California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(22)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, San Diego, California; 
Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, 
San Diego, California; Center for Microbiome Innovation, University of 
California San Diego, San Diego, California.
(23)Division of Gastroenterology, University of California San Diego, San Diego, 
California; Division of Gastroenterology, Northwestern University, Chicago, 
Illinois. Electronic address: parambir.dulai@northwestern.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT) is a promising treatment for 
moderate-to-severe ulcerative colitis. However, our current understanding of the 
host and microbial response to HBOT remains unclear. This study examined the 
molecular mechanisms underpinning HBOT using a multi-omic strategy.
METHODS: Pre- and post-intervention mucosal biopsies, tissue, and fecal samples 
were collected from HBOT phase 2 clinical trials. Biopsies and fecal samples 
were subjected to shotgun metaproteomics, metabolomics, 16s rRNA sequencing, and 
metagenomics. Tissue was subjected to bulk RNA sequencing and digital spatial 
profiling (DSP) for single-cell RNA and protein analysis, and 
immunohistochemistry was performed. Fecal samples were also used for 
colonization experiments in IL10-/- germ-free UC mouse models.
RESULTS: Proteomics identified negative associations between HBOT response and 
neutrophil azurophilic granule abundance. DSP identified an HBOT-specific 
reduction of neutrophil STAT3, which was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. HBOT 
decreased microbial diversity with a proportional increase in Firmicutes and a 
secondary bile acid lithocholic acid. A major source of the reduction in 
diversity was the loss of mucus-adherent taxa, resulting in increased MUC2 
levels post-HBOT. Targeted database searching revealed strain-level associations 
between Akkermansia muciniphila and HBOT response status. Colonization of 
IL10-/- with stool obtained from HBOT responders resulted in lower colitis 
activity compared with non-responders, with no differences in STAT3 expression, 
suggesting complementary but independent host and microbial responses.
CONCLUSIONS: HBOT reduces host neutrophil STAT3 and azurophilic granule activity 
in UC patients and changes in microbial composition and metabolism in ways that 
improve colitis activity. Intestinal microbiota, especially strain level 
variations in A muciniphila, may contribute to HBOT non-response.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2022.03.008
PMCID: PMC9117812
PMID: 35378331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2022 Jun 1;322(6):G535-G552. doi: 
10.1152/ajpgi.00008.2022. Epub 2022 Mar 10.

Microbial metabolites: cause or consequence in gastrointestinal disease?

Fobofou SA(1)(2), Savidge T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas.
(2)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Microbiome Center, Texas Children's 
Hospital, Houston, Texas.

Systems biology studies have established that changes in gastrointestinal 
microbiome composition and function can adversely impact host physiology. 
Notable diseases synonymously associated with dysbiosis include inflammatory 
bowel diseases, cancer, metabolic disorders, and opportunistic and recurrent 
pathogen infections. However, there is a scarcity of mechanistic data that 
advances our understanding of taxonomic correlations with pathophysiological 
host-microbiome interactions. Generally, to survive a hostile gut environment, 
microbes are highly metabolically active and produce trans-kingdom signaling 
molecules to interact with competing microorganisms and the host. These 
specialized metabolites likely play important homeostatic roles, and identifying 
disease-specific taxa and their effector pathways can provide better strategies 
for diagnosis, treatment, and prevention, as well as the discovery of innovative 
therapeutics. The signaling role of microbial biotransformation products such as 
bile acids, short-chain fatty acids, polysaccharides, and dietary tryptophan is 
increasingly recognized, but little is known about the identity and function of 
metabolites that are synthesized by microbial biosynthetic gene clusters, 
including ribosomally synthesized and posttranslationally modified peptides 
(RiPPs), nonribosomal peptides (NRPs), polyketides (PKs), PK-NRP hybrids, and 
terpenes. Here we consider how bioactive natural products directly encoded by 
the human microbiome can contribute to the pathophysiology of gastrointestinal 
disease, cancer, autoimmune, antimicrobial-resistant bacterial and viral 
infections (including COVID-19). We also present strategies used to discover 
these compounds and the biological activities they exhibit, with consideration 
of therapeutic interventions that could emerge from understanding molecular 
causation in gut microbiome research.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpgi.00008.2022
PMCID: PMC9054261
PMID: 35271353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Genome Biol. 2022 Mar 4;23(1):72. doi: 10.1186/s13059-022-02643-9.

Host-microbiome protein-protein interactions capture disease-relevant pathways.

Zhou H(#)(1), Beltrán JF(#)(2), Brito IL(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(2)Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.
(3)Meinig School of Biomedical Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. 
ibrito@cornell.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Host-microbe interactions are crucial for normal physiological and 
immune system development and are implicated in a variety of diseases, including 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), colorectal cancer (CRC), obesity, and type 2 
diabetes (T2D). Despite large-scale case-control studies aimed at identifying 
microbial taxa or genes involved in pathogeneses, the mechanisms linking them to 
disease have thus far remained elusive.
RESULTS: To identify potential pathways through which human-associated bacteria 
impact host health, we leverage publicly-available interspecies protein-protein 
interaction (PPI) data to find clusters of microbiome-derived proteins with high 
sequence identity to known human-protein interactors. We observe differential 
targeting of putative human-interacting bacterial genes in nine independent 
metagenomic studies, finding evidence that the microbiome broadly targets human 
proteins involved in immune, oncogenic, apoptotic, and endocrine signaling 
pathways in relation to IBD, CRC, obesity, and T2D diagnoses.
CONCLUSIONS: This host-centric analysis provides a mechanistic 
hypothesis-generating platform and extensively adds human functional annotation 
to commensal bacterial proteins.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-022-02643-9
PMCID: PMC8895870
PMID: 35246229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.

1. J Clin Invest. 2022 Mar 1;132(5):e155786. doi: 10.1172/JCI155786.

Fungal microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease: a critical assessment.

Underhill DM(1)(2)(3), Braun J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)F. Widjaja Inflammatory Bowel and Immunobiology Research Institute.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, and.
(3)Research Division of Immunology, Department of Biomedical Sciences; 
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA.

The gut microbiome is at the center of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 
pathogenesis and disease activity. While this has mainly been studied in the 
context of the bacterial microbiome, recent advances have provided tools for the 
study of host genetics and metagenomics of host-fungal interaction. Through 
these tools, strong evidence has emerged linking certain fungal taxa, such as 
Candida and Malassezia, with cellular and molecular pathways of IBD disease 
biology. Mouse models and human fecal microbial transplant also suggest that 
some disease-participatory bacteria and fungi may act not via the host directly, 
but via their fungal-bacterial ecologic interactions. We hope that these 
insights, and the study design and multi-omics strategies used to develop them, 
will facilitate the inclusion of the fungal community in basic and translational 
IBD research.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI155786
PMCID: PMC8884899
PMID: 35229726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2022 Aug 30;16(8):1281-1292. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac032.

A Microbial Signature for Paediatric Perianal Crohn's Disease.

Breton J(1), Tanes C(1), Tu V(1), Albenberg L(1), Rowley S(1), Devas N(1), Hwang 
R(2), Kachelries K(1), Wu GD(3), Baldassano RN(1), Bittinger K(1), Mattei P(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Division of General Surgery, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Perianal fistulising disease can affect up to 25% of 
patients with Crohn's disease [CD] and lead to significant morbidity. Although 
the role of the gut microbiota in inflammatory bowel disease [IBD] has been 
increasingly recognised, its role in fistula development has scarcely been 
studied. Here, we aimed to define the microbial signature associated with 
perianal fistulising CD in children.
METHODS: A prospective observational study including children age 6-18 years 
with a diagnosis of perianal fistulising CD was conducted. Stool samples and 
rectal and perianal fistula swabs were collected. Stool samples and rectal swabs 
from children with CD without perianal disease and healthy children were 
included as comparison. Whole shotgun metagenomic sequencing was performed.
RESULTS: A total of 31 children [mean age 15.5 ± 3.5 years] with perianal CD 
were prospectively enrolled. The fistula-associated microbiome showed an 
increase in alpha diversity and alteration in the abundance of several taxa 
compared with the rectal- and faecal-associated microbiome with key taxa 
belonging to the Proteobacteria phylum. Genes conferring resistance to the 
clinically used antibiotic regimen ciprofloxacin and metronidazole were found in 
the three sample types. In comparison with children without the perianal 
phenotype [N = 36] and healthy controls [N = 41], the mucosally-associated 
microbiome of children with perianal CD harboured a reduced butyrogenic 
potential. Linear discriminant analysis identified key taxa distinguishing the 
rectal mucosally-associated microbiome of children with perianal CD from 
children without this phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The microbial community within CD-related anorectal fistula is 
compositionally and functionally unique. Taken together, these findings 
emphasise the need to better understand the ecosystem of the fistula milieu to 
guide development of novel microbiome-based strategies in this CD phenotype.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of European 
Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjac032
PMID: 35211723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Genome Biol. 2022 Feb 23;23(1):61. doi: 10.1186/s13059-022-02637-7.

Meta-analysis defines predominant shared microbial responses in various diseases 
and a specific inflammatory bowel disease signal.

Abbas-Egbariya H(#)(1), Haberman Y(#)(2)(3), Braun T(1), Hadar R(1), Denson 
L(4), Gal-Mor O(5), Amir A(6).

Author information:
(1)Sheba Medical Center, Tel-HaShomer, affiliated with the Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Sheba Medical Center, Tel-HaShomer, affiliated with the Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel. Yael.Haberman@sheba.health.gov.il.
(3)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and the University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA. 
Yael.Haberman@sheba.health.gov.il.
(4)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and the University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(5)The Infectious Diseases Research Laboratory, Sheba Medical Center, 
Tel-Hashomer, and the Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)Sheba Medical Center, Tel-HaShomer, affiliated with the Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel Aviv, Israel. amnonim@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Gut microbial alteration is implicated in inflammatory bowel disease 
but is noted in other diseases. Systematic comparison to define similarities and 
specificities is hampered since most studies focus on a single disease.
RESULTS: We develop a pipeline to compare between disease cohorts starting from 
the raw V4 16S amplicon sequence variants. Including 12,838 subjects, from 59 
disease cohorts, we demonstrate a predominant shared signature across diseases, 
indicating a common bacterial response to different diseases. We show that 
classifiers trained on one disease cohort predict relatively well other diseases 
due to this shared signal, and hence, caution should be taken when using such 
classifiers in real-world scenarios, where diseases are intermixed. Based on 
this common signature across a large array of diseases, we develop a universal 
dysbiosis index that successfully differentiates between cases and controls 
across various diseases and can be used for prioritizing fecal donors and 
samples with lower disease probability. Finally, we identify a set of 
IBD-specific bacteria, which can direct mechanistic studies and design of 
IBD-specific microbial interventions.
CONCLUSIONS: A robust non-specific general response of the gut microbiome is 
detected in a large array of diseases. Disease classifiers may confuse between 
different diseases due to this shared microbial response. Our universal 
dysbiosis index can be used as a tool to prioritize fecal samples and donors. 
Finally, the IBD-specific taxa may indicate a more direct association to gut 
inflammation and disease pathogenesis, and those can be further used as 
biomarkers and as future targets for interventions.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13059-022-02637-7
PMCID: PMC8867743
PMID: 35197084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Nutrients. 2022 Jan 8;14(2):260. doi: 10.3390/nu14020260.

Intestinal Taxa Abundance and Diversity in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients: 
An Analysis including Covariates and Confounders.

Teofani A(1), Marafini I(2), Laudisi F(2), Pietrucci D(3)(4), Salvatori S(2), 
Unida V(1), Biocca S(2), Monteleone G(2), Desideri A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via Montpellier 1, 
00133 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Systems Medicine, University of Rome Tor Vergata, Via 
Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.
(3)Department for Innovation in Biological, Agro-food and Forest Systems, 
University of Tuscia, 01100 Viterbo, Italy.
(4)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies, 
IBIOM, CNR, 70126 Bari, Italy.

Intestinal dysbiosis has been widely documented in inflammatory bowel diseases 
(IBDs) and is thought to influence the onset and perpetuation of gut 
inflammation. However, it remains unclear whether such bacterial changes rely in 
part on the modification of an IBD-associated lifestyle (e.g., smoking and 
physical activity) and diet (e.g., rich in dairy products, cereals, meat and 
vegetables). In this study, we investigated the impact of these habits, which we 
defined as confounders and covariates, on the modulation of intestinal taxa 
abundance and diversity in IBD patients. 16S rRNA gene sequence analysis was 
performed using genomic DNA extracted from the faecal samples of 52 patients 
with Crohn's disease (CD) and 58 with ulcerative colitis (UC), which are the two 
main types of IBD, as well as 42 healthy controls (HC). A reduced microbial 
diversity was documented in the IBD patients compared with the HC. Moreover, we 
identified specific confounders and covariates that influenced the association 
between some bacterial taxa and disease extent (in UC patients) or behaviour (in 
CD patients) compared with the HC. In particular, a PERMANOVA stepwise 
regression identified the variables "age", "eat yogurt at least four days per 
week" and "eat dairy products at least 4 days per week" as covariates when 
comparing the HC and patients affected by ulcerative proctitis (E1), left-sided 
UC (distal UC) (E2) and extensive UC (pancolitis) (E3). Instead, the variables 
"age", "gender", "eat meat at least four days per week" and "eat bread at least 
4 days per week" were considered as covariates when comparing the HC with the CD 
patients affected by non-stricturing, non-penetrating (B1), stricturing (B2) and 
penetrating (B3) diseases. Considering such variables, our analysis indicated 
that the UC extent differentially modulated the abundance of the 
Bifidobacteriaceae, Rikenellaceae, Christensenellaceae, Marinifilaceae, 
Desulfovibrionaceae, Lactobacillaceae, Streptococcaceae and 
Peptostreptococcaceae families, while the CD behaviour influenced the abundance 
of Christensenellaceae, Marinifilaceae, Rikenellaceae, Ruminococcaceae, 
Barnesiellaceae and Coriobacteriaceae families. In conclusion, our study 
indicated that some covariates and confounders related to an IBD-associated 
lifestyle and dietary habits influenced the intestinal taxa diversity and 
relative abundance in the CD and UC patients compared with the HC. Indeed, such 
variables should be identified and excluded from the analysis to characterize 
the bacterial families whose abundance is directly modulated by IBD status, as 
well as disease extent or behaviour.

DOI: 10.3390/nu14020260
PMCID: PMC8778135
PMID: 35057440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Bioinformatics. 2022 Mar 4;38(6):1615-1623. doi:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btac003.

MIMOSA2: a metabolic network-based tool for inferring mechanism-supported 
relationships in microbiome-metabolome data.

Noecker C(1), Eng A(1), Muller E(2), Borenstein E(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, 
USA.
(2)Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler Faculty of 
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(4)Santa Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA.

MOTIVATION: Recent technological developments have facilitated an expansion of 
microbiome-metabolome studies, in which samples are assayed using both genomic 
and metabolomic technologies to characterize the abundances of microbial taxa 
and metabolites. A common goal of these studies is to identify microbial species 
or genes that contribute to differences in metabolite levels across samples. 
Previous work indicated that integrating these datasets with reference knowledge 
on microbial metabolic capacities may enable more precise and confident 
inference of microbe-metabolite links.
RESULTS: We present MIMOSA2, an R package and web application for model-based 
integrative analysis of microbiome-metabolome datasets. MIMOSA2 uses genomic and 
metabolic reference databases to construct a community metabolic model based on 
microbiome data and uses this model to predict differences in metabolite levels 
across samples. These predictions are compared with metabolomics data to 
identify putative microbiome-governed metabolites and taxonomic contributors to 
metabolite variation. MIMOSA2 supports various input data types and 
customization with user-defined metabolic pathways. We establish MIMOSA2's 
ability to identify ground truth microbial mechanisms in simulation datasets, 
compare its results with experimentally inferred mechanisms in honeybee 
microbiota, and demonstrate its application in two human studies of inflammatory 
bowel disease. Overall, MIMOSA2 combines reference databases, a validated 
statistical framework, and a user-friendly interface to facilitate modeling and 
evaluating relationships between members of the microbiota and their metabolic 
products.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: MIMOSA2 is implemented in R under the GNU 
General Public License v3.0 and is freely available as a web server at 
http://elbo-spice.cs.tau.ac.il/shiny/MIMOSA2shiny/ and as an R package from 
http://www.borensteinlab.com/software_MIMOSA2.html.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics 
online.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btac003
PMCID: PMC8896604
PMID: 34999748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. ISME Commun. 2021 Dec 18;1(1):80. doi: 10.1038/s43705-021-00080-6.

Longitudinal study of stool-associated microbial taxa in sibling pairs with and 
without autism spectrum disorder.

Tataru C(#)(1), Martin A(#)(2), Dunlap K(3), Peras M(4), Chrisman BS(3)(5), 
Rutherford E(4), Deitzler GE(2), Phillips A(2), Yin X(4), Sabino K(4), Hannibal 
RL(4), Hartono W(4), Lin M(4), Raack E(4), Wu Y(4), DeSantis TZ(4), Iwai S(4), 
Wall DP(3)(6)(7), David MM(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 
tataruc@oregonstate.edu.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics (Systems Medicine), Biomedical Data Science, and 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(4)Second Genome Inc., Brisbane, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(6)Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 
USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University, 
Stanford, CA, USA.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 
maude.david@oregonstate.edu.
(9)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Oregon State University, Corvallis, 
OR, USA. maude.david@oregonstate.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder 
influenced by both genetic and environmental factors. Recently, gut dysbiosis 
has emerged as a powerful contributor to ASD symptoms. In this study, we 
recruited over 100 age-matched sibling pairs (between 2 and 8 years old) where 
one had an Autism ASD diagnosis and the other was developing typically (TD) (432 
samples total). We collected stool samples over four weeks, tracked over 100 
lifestyle and dietary variables, and surveyed behavior measures related to ASD 
symptoms. We identified 117 amplicon sequencing variants (ASVs) that were 
significantly different in abundance between sibling pairs across all three 
timepoints, 11 of which were supported by at least two contrast methods. We 
additionally identified dietary and lifestyle variables that differ 
significantly between cohorts, and further linked those variables to the ASVs 
they statistically relate to. Overall, dietary and lifestyle features were 
explanatory of ASD phenotype using logistic regression, however, global 
compositional microbiome features were not. Leveraging our longitudinal behavior 
questionnaires, we additionally identified 11 ASVs associated with changes in 
reported anxiety over time within and across all individuals. Lastly, we find 
that overall microbiome composition (beta-diversity) is associated with specific 
ASD-related behavioral characteristics.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43705-021-00080-6
PMCID: PMC9723651
PMID: 37938270

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare a conflict of interest. The 
authors affiliated with Second Genome, Inc. have the following competing 
interests: Second Genome Inc. employs and provides stock options to all authors 
affiliated with Second Genome Inc. MMD has a financial interest in Second Genome 
Inc. Second Genome Inc. is an independent therapeutics company with products in 
development to treat Inflammatory Bowel Diseases and Cancer, and could 
potentially benefit from the outcomes of this research. MMD is co-owner of 
Microbiome Engineering Inc., a company specialized in developing biosensors. DPW 
is cofounder of Cognoa, a company focused on digital methods for healthy child 
development.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 21;22(21):11365. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111365.

Microbiota-Immune Interactions in Ulcerative Colitis and Colitis Associated 
Cancer and Emerging Microbiota-Based Therapies.

Popov J(1)(2), Caputi V(3), Nandeesha N(4), Rodriguez DA(5), Pai N(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.
(2)College of Medicine and Health, University College Cork, T12 XF62 Cork, 
Ireland.
(3)Department of Poultry Science, University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 
72701, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, D02 YN77 Dublin, 
Ireland.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada.
(6)Farncombe Family Digestive Health Research Institute, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON L8S 4L8, Canada.

Ulcerative colitis (UC) is a chronic autoimmune disorder affecting the colonic 
mucosa. UC is a subtype of inflammatory bowel disease along with Crohn's disease 
and presents with varying extraintestinal manifestations. No single etiology for 
UC has been found, but a combination of genetic and environmental factors is 
suspected. Research has focused on the role of intestinal dysbiosis in the 
pathogenesis of UC, including the effects of dysbiosis on the integrity of the 
colonic mucosal barrier, priming and regulation of the host immune system, 
chronic inflammation, and progression to tumorigenesis. Characterization of key 
microbial taxa and their implications in the pathogenesis of UC and 
colitis-associated cancer (CAC) may present opportunities for modulating 
intestinal inflammation through microbial-targeted therapies. In this review, we 
discuss the microbiota-immune crosstalk in UC and CAC, as well as the evolution 
of microbiota-based therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111365
PMCID: PMC8584103
PMID: 34768795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors disclose no relevant conflict of 
interest.

1. Front Microbiol. 2021 Oct 20;12:705583. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.705583. 
eCollection 2021.

The Capacity to Produce Hydrogen Sulfide (H(2)S) via Cysteine Degradation Is 
Ubiquitous in the Human Gut Microbiome.

Braccia DJ(1), Jiang X(2), Pop M(1)(3), Hall AB(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, University of Maryland, 
College Park, College Park, MD, United States.
(2)National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
United States.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, College 
Park, MD, United States.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics, University of Maryland, 
College Park, College Park, MD, United States.

As one of the three mammalian gasotransmitters, hydrogen sulfide (H2S) plays a 
major role in maintaining physiological homeostasis. Endogenously produced H2S 
plays numerous beneficial roles including mediating vasodilation and conferring 
neuroprotection. Due to its high membrane permeability, exogenously produced H2S 
originating from the gut microbiota can also influence human physiology and is 
implicated in reducing intestinal mucosal integrity and potentiating 
genotoxicity and is therefore a potential target for therapeutic interventions. 
Gut microbial H2S production is often attributed to dissimilatory sulfate 
reducers such as Desulfovibrio and Bilophila species. However, an alternative 
source for H2S production, cysteine degradation, is present in some gut 
microbes, but the genes responsible for cysteine degradation have not been 
systematically annotated in all known gut microbes. We classify mechanisms of 
cysteine degradation into primary, secondary, and erroneous levels of H2S 
production and perform a comprehensive search for primary, secondary, and 
erroneous cysteine-degrading enzymes in 4,644 non-redundant bacterial genomes 
from the Unified Human Gastrointestinal Genome (UHGG) catalog. Of the 4,644 
genomes we have putatively identified 2,046 primary, 1,951 secondary, and 5 
erroneous cysteine-degrading species. We identified the presence of at least one 
putative cysteine-degrading bacteria in metagenomic data of 100% of 6,623 
healthy subjects and the expression of cysteine-degrading genes in 
metatranscriptomic data of 100% of 736 samples taken from 318 individuals. 
Additionally, putative cysteine-degrading bacteria are more abundant than 
sulfate-reducing bacteria across healthy controls, IBD patients and CRC patients 
(p < 2.2e-16, Wilcoxon rank sum test). Although we have linked many taxa with 
the potential for cysteine degradation, experimental validation is required to 
establish the H2S production potential of the gut microbiome. Overall, this 
study improves our understanding of the capacity for H2S production by the human 
gut microbiome and may help to inform interventions to therapeutically modulate 
gut microbial H2S production.

Copyright © 2021 Braccia, Jiang, Pop and Hall.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.705583
PMCID: PMC8564485
PMID: 34745023

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Gut Microbes. 2021 Jan-Dec;13(1):1984105. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2021.1984105.

Colonic expression of Ace2, the SARS-CoV-2 entry receptor, is suppressed by 
commensal human microbiota.

Edwinson A(1), Yang L(2), Chen J(2), Grover M(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA.

Infection with severe acute respiratory syndrome-coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) is 
responsible for the COVID-19 pandemic. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (Ace2) is 
expressed in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract and a receptor for SARS-CoV-2, 
making the GI tract a potential infection site. This study investigated the 
effects of commensal intestinal microbiota on colonic Ace2 expression using a 
humanized mouse model. We found that colonic Ace2 expression decreased 
significantly upon microbial colonization. Humanization with healthy volunteer 
or dysbiotic microbiota from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) patients resulted in 
similar Ace2 expression. Despite the differences in microbiota, no associations 
between α-diversity, β-diversity or individual taxa, and Ace2 were noted 
post-humanization. These results highlight that commensal microbiota play a key 
role in regulating intestinal Ace2 expression and the need to further examine 
the underlying mechanisms of this regulation.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2021.1984105
PMCID: PMC8510562
PMID: 34632957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).

1. Sci Rep. 2021 Sep 9;11(1):17866. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-97261-z.

The gastric microbiota in patients with Crohn's disease; a preliminary study.

Ostrowski J(1)(2), Kulecka M(3)(4), Zawada I(5), Żeber-Lubecka N(4), Paziewska 
A(3)(4), Graca-Pakulska K(5), Dąbkowski K(5), Skubisz K(4), Cybula P(4), 
Ambrożkiewicz F(3), Urasińska E(6), Mikula M(3), Starzyńska T(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Maria Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of 
Oncology, Roentgena 5, 02-781, Warsaw, Poland. jostrow@warman.com.pl.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Clinical Oncology, Centre of 
Postgraduate Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland. jostrow@warman.com.pl.
(3)Department of Genetics, Maria Skłodowska-Curie National Research Institute of 
Oncology, Roentgena 5, 02-781, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Clinical Oncology, Centre of 
Postgraduate Medical Education, Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, 
Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-252, Szczecin, Poland.
(6)Department of Pathology, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Szczecin, 
Poland.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, 
Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-252, Szczecin, Poland. testa@pum.edu.pl.

The gastric microbiota in Crohn's disease (CD) has not been studied. The purpose 
of the study was to evaluate differences of stomach microbiota between CD 
patients and controls. DNA was extracted from gastric mucosal and fluid samples, 
from 24 CD patients and 19 controls. 16S rRNA gene sequencing identified 1511 
operational taxonomic units (OTUs), of which 239 passed the low abundance and 
low variance filters. All but one CD patients were HP negative. Fifteen 
bacterial phyla were identified in at least one mucosal or fluid site. Of these, 
Bacteroidota and Firmicutes accounted for 70% of all phyla. Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteriota, and Fusobacteriota combined accounted for 27%. There was 
significant difference in the relative abundance of Bacteroidota, 
Proteobacteria, Fusobacteriota, and Campilobacterota between CD patients and 
controls only in gastric corpus samples. In gastric liquid, there was a 
significant difference only in Actinobacteriota. Pairwise comparison identified 
67 differentially abundant OTUs in at least one site. Of these, 13 were present 
in more than one comparison, and four differentiating OTUs (Neisseriaceae, 
Neisseria, Absconditabacteriales, and Microbacteriaceae) were identified at all 
tested sites. The results reveal significant changes in gastric microbial 
profiles (beta diversity, phylum, and individual taxa levels) between H. 
pylori-negative CD patients and controls.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-97261-z
PMCID: PMC8429686
PMID: 34504159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Int Immunol. 2021 Nov 25;33(12):787-790. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxab066.

Therapeutic immunoglobulin A antibody for dysbiosis-related diseases.

Shinkura R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology and Infection Control, Institute for Quantitative 
Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.
(2)Collaborative Research Institute for Innovative Microbiology, University of 
Tokyo, 1‑1‑1 Yayoi, Bunkyo‑ku, Tokyo 113‑0032, Japan.
(3)Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology, Japan Agency for 
Medical Research and Development, Tokyo 100-0004, Japan.

Dysbiosis is alterations in the microbial composition compared with a healthy 
microbiota and often features a reduction in gut microbial diversity and a 
change in microbial taxa. Dysbiosis, especially in the gut, has also been 
proposed to play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of a wide variety of 
diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, colorectal cancer, 
cardiovascular disease, obesity, diabetes and multiple sclerosis. A body of 
evidence has shown that intestinal polymeric immunoglobulin A (IgA) antibodies 
are important to regulate the gut microbiota as well as to exclude pathogenic 
bacteria or viral infection such as influenza and SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) at mucosal sites. Since the 1970s, trials 
for oral administration of therapeutic IgA or IgG have been performed mainly to 
treat infectious enteritis caused by pathogenic Escherichia coli or Clostridium 
difficile. However, few of them have been successfully developed for clinical 
application up to now. In addition to the protective function against intestinal 
pathogens, IgA is well known to modulate the gut commensal microbiota leading to 
symbiosis. Nevertheless, the development of therapeutic IgA drugs to treat 
dysbiosis is not progressing. In this review, the advantages of therapeutic IgA 
antibodies and the problems for their development will be discussed.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2021. All rights reserved. For 
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/intimm/dxab066
PMCID: PMC8499904
PMID: 34492105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Mol Biol Rep. 2021 Jul;48(7):5519-5529. doi: 10.1007/s11033-021-06567-8. Epub 
2021 Jul 25.

Characterization of the gut microbiota in patients with primary sclerosing 
cholangitis compared to inflammatory bowel disease and healthy controls.

Ostadmohammadi S(1), Azimirad M(1), Houri H(1), Naseri K(1), Javanmard E(1), 
Mirjalali H(1), Yadegar A(2), Sadeghi A(3), Asadzadeh Aghdaei H(4), Zali MR(5).

Author information:
(1)Foodborne and Waterborne Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Foodborne and Waterborne Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. a.yadegar@sbmu.ac.ir.
(3)Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. amirsadeghimd@yahoo.com.
(4)Basic and Molecular Epidemiology of Gastrointestinal Disorders Research 
Center, Research Institute for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid 
Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases Research Center, Research Institute for 
Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) is a chronic cholestatic liver 
disease. Its etiology remains largely unknown, although frequent concomitant 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) hints towards common factors underlying 
intestinal and bile duct inflammation. Herein, we aimed to explore the relative 
abundance of fecal microbiota in PSC-IBD patients compared to IBD-only subjects 
and controls.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We included 14 PSC-IBD patients, 12 IBD-only patients, and 
8 healthy controls (HCs). A quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) assay was used to 
determine a selection of bacterial phyla, families, and genera. Relative 
abundance of taxa showed that Bacteroidetes was the most abundant phylum among 
the patients with PSC-IBD (29.46%) and also HCs (39.34%), whereas the bacterial 
species belonging to the phylum Firmicutes were the most frequent group in 
IBD-only subjects (37.61%). The relative abundance of the Enterobacteriaceae 
family in fecal samples of PSC-IBD patients was similar to those with IBD-only, 
which was significantly higher than HCs (p value = 0.031), and thus, could be 
used as a PSC-IBD or IBD-only associated microbial signature.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings showed that intestinal microbiota composition in 
PSC-IBD patients was completely different from that of IBD-only patients. 
Further studies using large-scale cohorts should be performed to better describe 
the contribution of the gut microbiota to PSC pathogenesis with underlying IBD.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-021-06567-8
PMID: 34304365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Nutrients. 2021 Jun 17;13(6):2069. doi: 10.3390/nu13062069.

Timing of Tributyrin Supplementation Differentially Modulates Gastrointestinal 
Inflammation and Gut Microbial Recolonization Following Murine Ileocecal 
Resection.

Mocanu V(1), Park H(2), Dang J(1), Hotte N(3), Thiesen A(4), Laffin M(1), Wang 
H(1), Birch D(1), Madsen K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(2)Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, Canada.
(5)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2R3, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Gastrointestinal surgery imparts dramatic and lasting imbalances, or 
dysbiosis, to the composition of finely tuned microbial ecosystems. The aim of 
the present study was to use a mouse ileocecal resection (ICR) model to 
determine if tributyrin (TBT) supplementation could prevent the onset of 
microbial dysbiosis or alternatively enhance the recovery of the gut microbiota 
and reduce gastrointestinal inflammation.
METHODS: Male wild-type (129 s1/SvlmJ) mice aged 8-15 weeks were separated into 
single cages and randomized 1:1:1:1 to each of the four experimental groups: 
control (CTR), preoperative TBT supplementation (PRE), postoperative TBT 
supplementation (POS), and combined pre- and postoperative supplementation 
(TOT). ICR was performed one week from baseline assessment with mice assessed at 
1, 2, 3, and 4 weeks postoperatively. Primary outcomes included evaluating 
changes to gut microbial communities occurring from ICR to 4 weeks.
RESULTS: A total of 34 mice that underwent ICR (CTR n = 9; PRE n = 10; POS n = 
9; TOT n = 6) and reached the primary endpoint were included in the analysis. 
Postoperative TBT supplementation was associated with an increased 
recolonization and abundance of anaerobic taxa including Bacteroides 
thetaiotomicorn, Bacteroides caecimuris, Parabacteroides distasonis, and 
Clostridia. The microbial recolonization of PRE mice was characterized by a 
bloom of aerotolerant organisms including Staphylococcus, Lactobacillus, 
Enteroccaceae, and Peptostreptococcacea. PRE mice had a trend towards decreased 
ileal inflammation as evidenced by decreased levels of IL-1β (p = 0.09), IL-6 (p 
= 0.03), and TNF-α (p < 0.05) compared with mice receiving TBT postoperatively. 
In contrast, POS mice had trends towards reduced colonic inflammation 
demonstrated by decreased levels of IL-6 (p = 0.07) and TNF-α (p = 0.07). These 
changes occurred in the absence of changes to fecal short-chain fatty acid 
concentrations or histologic injury scoring.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, the results of our work demonstrate that the timing 
of tributyrin supplementation differentially modulates gastrointestinal 
inflammation and gut microbial recolonization following murine ICR.

DOI: 10.3390/nu13062069
PMCID: PMC8233937
PMID: 34204288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Front Pharmacol. 2021 May 21;12:640347. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2021.640347. 
eCollection 2021.

Metformin Affects Gut Microbiota Composition and Diversity Associated with 
Amelioration of Dextran Sulfate Sodium-Induced Colitis in Mice.

Liu Z(1)(2), Liao W(3), Zhang Z(1)(2), Sun R(1)(2), Luo Y(4), Chen Q(4), Li 
X(3), Lu R(3), Ying Y(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Jiangxi Institute of Respiratory Disease, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(2)Queen Mary School, Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.
(3)Departments of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.
(4)Department of Pathophysiology, Schools of Basic Medical Sciences, Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, China.
(5)The Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, The First 
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China.

Background: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an increasingly common and 
globally emergent immune-mediated disorder. The etiology of IBD is complex, 
involving multiple factors such as immune dysregulation, environmental factors, 
genetic mutations, and microbiota dysbiosis, exacerbated by a lack of effective 
clinical therapies. Recently, studies hypothesized that dysbiosis of intestinal 
flora might participate in the onset of IBD. Metformin is widely used to treat 
type 2 diabetes and has shown beneficial effects in mouse models of IBD, 
although its underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Accumulating 
studies found that metformin shows beneficial effects for diabetes by affecting 
microbiota composition. This study explores possible regulatory effects of 
metformin on intestinal microecology during treatment for IBD. Methods: 
Inflammation was induced using 3% Dextran Sulfate Sodium (DSS) solution to 
generate mice models of IBD. Metformin treatments were assayed by measuring body 
weights and colon lengths of mice and H&E staining to observe histological 
effects on colon tissue structures. Changes in bacterial community composition 
and diversity-related to IBD and metformin treatment were assessed by 
high-throughput metagenomic sequencing analysis. Results: Metformin 
administration significantly ameliorated body weight loss, inhibited colon 
shrinking, and contributed to preserving the integrity of colon histological 
structures. The gut microbiota profiles revealed that the biodiversity of 
intestinal flora lost during inflammation was restored under metformin 
treatment. Metformin administration was also associated with decreased 
pathogenic Escherichia shigella and increased abundance of Lactobacillus and 
Akkermansia. Conclusion: Metformin appears to induce anti-inflammatory effects, 
thus ameliorating colitis symptoms, concurrent with enrichment for beneficial 
taxa and restored microbial diversity, suggesting a viable strategy against IBD.

Copyright © 2021 Liu, Liao, Zhang, Sun, Luo, Chen, Li, Lu and Ying.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2021.640347
PMCID: PMC8191634
PMID: 34122067

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2021 Nov 15;27(12):1889-1900. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izab082.

Site- and Taxa-Specific Disease-Associated Oral Microbial Structures Distinguish 
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases.

Somineni HK(1)(2), Weitzner JH(1), Venkateswaran S(1), Dodd A(1), Prince J(1), 
Karikaran A(1), Sauer CG(1), Abramowicz S(3), Zwick ME(4), Cutler DJ(4), Okou 
DT(1), Chopra P(4), Kugathasan S(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Emory University School of Medicine 
and Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Genetics and Molecular Biology Program, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, 
USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, Division of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: The gut and oral microbiome have independently been shown to be 
associated with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, it is not known to 
what extent gut and oral microbial disease markers converge in terms of their 
composition in IBD. Further, the spatial and temporal variation within the oral 
microenvironments of IBD remain to be elucidated.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We used a prospectively recruited cohort of patients with 
IBD (n = 47) and unrelated healthy control patients (n = 18) to examine the 
spatial and temporal distribution of microbiota within the various oral 
microenvironments, represented by saliva, tongue, buccal mucosa, and plaque, and 
compared them with stool. Microbiome characterization was performed using 16S 
rRNA gene sequencing.
RESULTS: The oral microbiome displayed IBD-associated dysbiosis, in a site- and 
taxa-specific manner. Plaque samples depicted a relatively severe degree of 
dysbiosis, and the disease-associated dysbiotic bacterial groups were 
predominantly the members of the phylum Firmicutes. Our 16S rRNA gene analyses 
show that oral microbiota can distinguish patients with IBD from healthy control 
patients, with salivary microbiota performing the best, closely matched by stool 
and other oral sites. Longitudinal profiles of microbial composition suggest 
that some taxa are more consistently perturbed than others, preferentially in a 
site-dependent fashion.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data indicate the potential of using oral 
microbial profiles in screening and monitoring patients with IBD. Furthermore, 
these results support the importance of spatial and longitudinal microbiome 
sampling to interpret disease-associated dysbiotic states and eventually to gain 
insights into disease pathogenesis.

© 2021 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press. All 
rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izab082
PMCID: PMC8599042
PMID: 34002220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2021 Apr 27;15:11779322211012697. doi: 
10.1177/11779322211012697. eCollection 2021.

Significance of African Diets in Biotherapeutic Modulation of the Gut 
Microbiome.

Isibor PO(1), Akinduti PA(1), Aworunse OS(1), Oyewale JO(1), Oshamika O(1), 
Ugboko HU(1), Taiwo OS(1), Ahuekwe EF(1), Obafemi YD(1), Onibokun EA(1), Oziegbe 
O(1), Oniha MI(1), Olopade BK(1), Atolagbe OM(1), Adekeye BT(1), Ajiboye IB(1), 
Bello OA(1), Popoola JO(1), Ayanda OI(1), Akinnola OO(1), Olasehinde GI(1), Eni 
AO(1), Nwinyi OC(1), Omonhinmin CA(1), Oranusi SU(1), Obembe OO(1).

Author information:
(1)Biotechnology Research Centre, Department of Biological Sciences, Covenant 
University, Ota, Nigeria.

Diet plays an essential role in human development and growth, contributing to 
health and well-being. The socio-economic values, cultural perspectives, and 
dietary formulation in sub-Saharan Africa can influence gut health and disease 
prevention. The vast microbial ecosystems in the human gut frequently 
interrelate to maintain a healthy, well-coordinated cellular and humoral immune 
signalling to prevent metabolic dysfunction, pathogen dominance, and induction 
of systemic diseases. The diverse indigenous diets could differentially act as 
biotherapeutics to modulate microbial abundance and population characteristics. 
Such modulation could prevent stunted growth, malnutrition, induction of bowel 
diseases, attenuated immune responses, and mortality, particularly among 
infants. Understanding the associations between specific indigenous African 
diets and the predictability of the dynamics of gut bacteria genera promises 
potential biotherapeutics towards improving the prevention, control, and 
treatment of microbiome-associated diseases such as cancer, inflammatory bowel 
disease, obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. The dietary 
influence of many African diets (especially grain-base such as millet, maize, 
brown rice, sorghum, soya, and tapioca) promotes gut lining integrity, immune 
tolerance towards the microbiota, and its associated immune and inflammatory 
responses. A fibre-rich diet is a promising biotherapeutic candidate that could 
effectively modulate inflammatory mediators' expression associated with immune 
cell migration, lymphoid tissue maturation, and signalling pathways. It could 
also modulate the stimulation of cytokines and chemokines involved in ensuring 
balance for long-term microbiome programming. The interplay between host and gut 
microbial digestion is complex; microbes using and competing for dietary and 
endogenous proteins are often attributable to variances in the comparative 
abundances of Enterobacteriaceae taxa. Many auto-inducers could initiate the 
process of quorum sensing and mammalian epinephrine host cell signalling system. 
It could also downregulate inflammatory signals with microbiota tumour taxa that 
could trigger colorectal cancer initiation, metabolic type 2 diabetes, and 
inflammatory bowel diseases. The exploitation of essential biotherapeutic 
molecules derived from fibre-rich indigenous diet promises food substances for 
the downregulation of inflammatory signalling that could be harmful to gut 
microbiota ecological balance and improved immune response modulation.

© The Author(s) 2021.

DOI: 10.1177/11779322211012697
PMCID: PMC8107938
PMID: 33994782

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests:The 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2021 Jul 1;33(4):341-347. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000800.

Intestinal dysbiosis in spondyloarthritis - chicken or egg?

Breban M(1)(2)(3), Beaufrère M(1)(2)(3), Glatigny S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Infection & Inflammation, UMR 1173, Inserm, UVSQ/Université Paris Saclay, 
Montigny-le-Bretonneux.
(2)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Ambroise Paré, AP-HP, Boulogne.
(3)Laboratoire d'Excellence Inflamex, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris 
Cité, Paris, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The well-established link between intestinal inflammation and 
spondyloarthritis (SpA) remains largely unexplained. Recent sequencing 
technologies have given access to a thorough characterization of the gut 
microbiota in healthy and disease conditions. This showed that inflammatory 
bowel disease (IBD) is associated with dysbiosis - i.e., disturbed gut 
microbiota composition - which may contribute to disease pathogenesis. Whether 
gut dysbiosis exists in SpA and could contribute to disease development or be a 
bystander consequence of chronic inflammation is a question of major interest.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several metagenomic studies have been performed in SpA. Most of 
them concerned faecal samples and showed dysbiosis consisting in a reduction of 
microbial biodiversity in a way similar to what has been described in IBD. They 
also highlighted changes in microbial taxa composition that could contribute to 
the inflammatory process. Likewise, healthy carriers of human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA)-B27 exhibited gut dysbiosis, indicating that this predisposing allele 
could exert its pathogenic effect by influencing microbiota composition, and 
possibly by driving antigen-specific cross-reactive immune response. On the 
other hand, SpA treatments were associated with a reduction of dysbiosis, 
showing that it is at least in part a consequence of inflammation.
SUMMARY: Recent insights from metagenomic studies warrant further investigations 
to identify the mechanisms by which microbial dysbiosis could contribute to SpA 
development. This would bring novel therapeutic opportunities aiming at 
correcting detrimental changes.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000800
PMID: 33973546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. Microorganisms. 2021 Apr 30;9(5):977. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms9050977.

Systematic Review: The Gut Microbiome and Its Potential Clinical Application in 
Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Aldars-García L(1)(2), Chaparro M(1)(2), Gisbert JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario de La Princesa, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria 
Princesa (IIS-IP), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28006 Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBEREHD), 28006 Madrid, Spain.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic relapsing-remitting systemic 
disease of the gastrointestinal tract. It is well established that the gut 
microbiome has a profound impact on IBD pathogenesis. Our aim was to 
systematically review the literature on the IBD gut microbiome and its 
usefulness to provide microbiome-based biomarkers. A systematic search of the 
online bibliographic database PubMed from inception to August 2020 with 
screening in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic 
Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines was conducted. One-hundred and 
forty-four papers were eligible for inclusion. There was a wide heterogeneity in 
microbiome analysis methods or experimental design. The IBD intestinal 
microbiome was generally characterized by reduced species richness and 
diversity, and lower temporal stability, while changes in the gut microbiome 
seemed to play a pivotal role in determining the onset of IBD. Multiple studies 
have identified certain microbial taxa that are enriched or depleted in IBD, 
including bacteria, fungi, viruses, and archaea. The two main features in this 
sense are the decrease in beneficial bacteria and the increase in pathogenic 
bacteria. Significant differences were also present between remission and 
relapse IBD status. Shifts in gut microbial community composition and abundance 
have proven to be valuable as diagnostic biomarkers. The gut microbiome plays a 
major role in IBD, yet studies need to go from casualty to causality. 
Longitudinal designs including newly diagnosed treatment-naïve patients are 
needed to provide insights into the role of microbes in the onset of intestinal 
inflammation. A better understanding of the human gut microbiome could provide 
innovative targets for diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and even cure of this 
relevant disease.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms9050977
PMCID: PMC8147118
PMID: 33946482

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.