1. Retrovirology. 2024 Nov 29;21(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s12977-024-00655-w.

Exploring potential associations between the human microbiota and reservoir of 
latent HIV.

Marín-Sánchez N(1)(2), Paredes R(3)(4)(5), Borgognone A(6).

Author information:
(1)IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Catalonia, Spain. rparedes@irsicaixa.es.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, 
Catalonia, Spain. rparedes@irsicaixa.es.
(5)Department of Pathology, Center for Global Health and Diseases, Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA. 
rparedes@irsicaixa.es.
(6)IrsiCaixa, Badalona, Catalonia, Spain. aborgognone@irsicaixa.es.

BACKGROUND: The rapid establishment and persistence of latent HIV-1 reservoirs 
is one of the main obstacles towards an HIV cure. While antiretroviral therapy 
supresses viral replication, it does not eradicate the latent reservoir of 
HIV-1-infected cells. Recent evidence suggests that the human microbiome, 
particularly the gut microbiome, may have the potential to modulate the HIV-1 
reservoir. However, literature is limited and the exact mechanisms underlying 
the role of the microbiome in HIV immunity and potential regulation of the viral 
reservoir remain poorly understood.
RESULTS: Here, we review updated knowledge on the associations between the human 
microbiome and HIV reservoir across different anatomical sites, including the 
gut, the lungs and blood. We provide an overview of the predominant taxa 
associated with prominent microbiome changes in the context of HIV infection. 
Based on the current evidence, we summarize the main study findings, with 
specific focus on consistent bacterial and related byproduct associations. 
Specifically, we address the contribution of immune activation and inflammatory 
signatures on HIV-1 persistence. Furthermore, we discuss possible scenarios by 
which bacterial-associated inflammatory mediators, related metabolites and host 
immune signatures may modulate the HIV reservoir size. Finally, we speculate on 
potential implications of microbiome-based therapeutics for future HIV-1 cure 
strategies, highlighting challenges and limitations inherent in this research 
field.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite recent advances, this review underscores the need for 
further research to deepen the understanding of the complex interplay between 
the human microbiome and HIV reservoir. Further integrative multi-omics 
assessments and functional studies are crucial to test the outlined hypothesis 
and to identify potential therapeutic targets ultimately able to achieve an 
effective cure for HIV.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12977-024-00655-w
PMCID: PMC11605983
PMID: 39614246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2024 Nov 29:e0188924. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.01889-24. Online
 ahead of print.

ITS amplicon sequencing revealed that rare taxa of tea rhizosphere fungi are 
closely related to the environment and provide feedback on tea tree diseases.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Ran W(1)(2), Xu W(1)(2), Song Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Karst Science, Guizhou Normal University, Guiyang, China.
(2)State Engineering Technology Institute for Karst Desertification Control, 
Guiyang, China.

The rhizospheres of plants and soil microorganisms are intricately 
interconnected. Tea trees are cultivated extensively on the karst plateau of 
Guizhou Province, China; however, the understanding of the interactions among 
fungal communities, community taxa, and diseases impacting tea tree in the soil 
rhizosphere is limited. Our aim is to offer insights for the advancement of 
modern agriculture in ecologically fragile karst tea gardens, as well as 
microbiomics concepts for green and sustainable environmental development. This 
study utilized the internal transcribed spacer high-throughput sequencing 
technology to explore the symbiotic relationship between rhizosphere fungi and 
plant disease feedback in multiple tea estates across the Guizhou Plateau. The 
ecological preferences and environmental thresholds of fungi were investigated 
via environmental variables. Furthermore, a correlation was established between 
different taxa and individual soil functions. Research has indicated that tea 
leaf blight disrupts symbiotic connections among fungal groups. For various 
taxa, we found that numerous taxa consistently maintained core positions within 
the community, whereas rare taxa were able to stabilize due to a high proportion 
of positive effects. Additionally, abundant taxa presented a wider range of 
environmental feedback, whereas the rare taxon diversity presented a stronger 
positive association with the soil Z score. This study contributes to our 
understanding of the importance of rare taxa in plant rhizosphere soil 
processes. Emphasis should be placed on the role of rare taxa in pest and 
disease control within green agriculture while also strengthening systematic 
development and biogeographical research related to rare taxa in this 
region.IMPORTANCEIn this study, based on internal transcribed spacer 
high-throughput sequencing, fungal communities in the rhizosphere soil of tea 
trees and their interactions with the environment in karst areas were reported, 
and the symbiotic relationships of different fungal taxa and their feedback to 
the environment were described in detail by using the knowledge of microbial 
ecology. On this basis, it was found that tea tree diseases affect the symbiotic 
relationships of fungal taxa. At the same time, we found that rare taxa have 
stronger cooperative relationships in response to environmental changes and 
explored their participation in soil processes based on fungal trait sets. This 
study will provide basic data for the development of modern agriculture in tea 
gardens and theoretical basis for the sustainable prevention and control of tea 
tree diseases.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01889-24
PMID: 39612478

1. Sleep Breath. 2024 Nov 28;29(1):18. doi: 10.1007/s11325-024-03193-z.

Short sleep time has a greater impact on the gut microbiota of female.

Gao F(#)(1), Ding L(2)(3), Du G(#)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Hainan Medical 
University, Haikou, China. 1438486432@qq.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, 
School of Basic Medicine and Life Sciences, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, 
China.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hainan Medical University, 
Haikou, China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, 
School of Basic Medicine and Life Sciences, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, 
China. duguankui@163.com.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hainan Medical University, 
Haikou, China. duguankui@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVE: Short sleep duration (SSD) affects people's health in 
multiple ways. This study attempted to explore the effect of SSD on the gut 
microbiota.
METHODS: In the American Gut Project Database, 361 individuals (without troubled 
by disease recently) with less than 6 h of sleep per day were obtained and 
matched with normal sleep time individuals according to gender, age, and BMI. 
Furthermore, the raw data of 16s rRNA in feces were downloaded and analyzed 
using QIIME2, and STAMP was used for data statistics. PICRUST2 was used for 
predicting the alteration of microbial function.
RESULTS: The SSD did not affect the microbial α-diversity. SSD increased the 
abundance of the phylum Verrucomicrobia and the families Rikenellaceae, 
Verrucomicrobiaceae, and S24-7, and decrased the Coriobacteriaceae. Moreover, 
PICRUST2 predicted that SSD affected 15 metabolic pathways. Subgroup analyses 
showed that SSD had more significant effects on the microbiota in normal-weight 
females.
CONCLUSION: SSD substantially modifies the abundance of specific gut microbiota 
taxa, exerting a pronounced influence particularly on females, highlighting the 
need for further investigation into the bidirectional relationship between sleep 
patterns and gut microbiota.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s11325-024-03193-z
PMID: 39607448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethical approval: This article 
does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of the 
authors. Conflict of interest: All authors certify that they have no 
affiliations.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Nov 20:2024.10.18.619118. doi: 
10.1101/2024.10.18.619118.

Longitudinal Microbiome-based Interpretable Machine Learning for Identification 
of Time-Varying Biomarkers in Early Prediction of Disease Outcomes.

Dai Y, Qian Y, Qu Y, Guan W, Xie J, Wang D, Butler C, Dashper S, Carroll I, 
Divaris K, Liu Y, Wu D.

Information generated from longitudinally-sampled microbial data has the 
potential to illuminate important aspects of development and progression for 
many human conditions and diseases. Identifying microbial biomarkers and their 
time-varying effects can not only advance our understanding of pathogenetic 
mechanisms, but also facilitate early diagnosis and guide optimal timing of 
interventions. However, longitudinal predictive modeling of highly noisy and 
dynamic microbial data (e.g., metagenomics) poses analytical challenges. To 
overcome these challenges, we introduce a robust and interpretable 
machine-learning-based longitudinal microbiome analysis framework, LP-Micro, 
that encompasses: (i) longitudinal microbial feature screening via a polynomial 
group lasso, (ii) disease outcome prediction implemented via machine learning 
methods (e.g., XGBoost, deep neural networks), and (iii) interpretable 
association testing between time points, microbial features, and disease 
outcomes via permutation feature importance. We demonstrate in simulations that 
LP-Micro can not only identify incident disease-related microbiome taxa but also 
offers improved prediction accuracy compared to existing approaches. 
Applications of LP-Micro in two longitudinal microbiome studies with clinical 
outcomes of childhood dental disease and weight loss following bariatric surgery 
yield consistently high prediction accuracy. The identified critical early 
predictive time points are informative and aligned with clinical expectations.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.10.18.619118
PMCID: PMC11601495
PMID: 39605360

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Nov 27;15(1):10291. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-54797-8.

Multi-biome analysis identifies distinct gut microbial signatures and their 
crosstalk in ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease.

Akiyama S(1), Nishijima S(#)(2), Kojima Y(3), Kimura M(4), Ohsugi M(5), Ueki 
K(6), Mizokami M(7), Hattori M(8), Tsuchiya K(1), Uemura N(9), Kawai T(10), Bork 
P(11), Nagata N(#)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Institute of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki, Japan.
(2)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany. nishijima.suguru@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Research Strategic Planning Center for Clinical 
Sciences, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Center Hospital, 
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Diabetes Research Center, Research Institute, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(7)Genome Medical Sciences Project, Research Institute, National Center for 
Global Health and Medicine, Chiba, Japan.
(8)Laboratory for Microbiome Sciences, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical 
Sciences, Yokohama, Japan.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, National Center for Global 
Health and Medicine, Kohnodai Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(10)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.
(12)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, 
Tokyo, Japan. nnagata_ncgm@yahoo.co.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

The integrative multi-kingdom interaction of the gut microbiome in ulcerative 
colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) remains underinvestigated. Here, we 
perform shotgun metagenomic sequencing of feces from patients with UC and CD, 
and healthy controls in the Japanese 4D cohort, profiling bacterial taxa, gene 
functions, and antibacterial genes, bacteriophages, and fungi. External 
metagenomic datasets from the US, Spain, the Netherlands, and China were 
analyzed to validate our multi-biome findings. We found that Enterococcus 
faecium and Bifidobacterium spp. were enriched in both diseases. Enriched 
Escherichia coli was characteristic of CD and was linked to numerous antibiotic 
resistance genes involved in efflux pumps and adherent-invasive Escherichia coli 
virulence factors. Virome changes correlated with shifts in the bacteriome, 
including increased abundances of phages encoding pathogenic genes. 
Saccharomyces paradoxus and Saccharomyces cerevisiae were enriched in UC and CD, 
respectively. Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Escherichia coli had negative 
associations with short-chain fatty acid (SCFA)-producing bacteria in CD. 
Multi-biome signatures and their interactions in UC and CD showed high 
similarities between Japan and other countries. Since bacteria, phages, and 
fungi formed multiple hubs of intra- or trans-kingdom networks with SCFA 
producers and pathobionts in UC and CD, an approach targeting the interaction 
network may hold therapeutic promise.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-54797-8
PMCID: PMC11603027
PMID: 39604394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. mSystems. 2024 Nov 27:e0136624. doi: 10.1128/msystems.01366-24. Online ahead
of  print.

Gut microbiota dysbiosis induced by alcohol exposure in pubertal and adult mice.

Yang J(#)(1)(2), Wang H(#)(3)(4)(5), Lin X(6), Liu J(1)(7), Feng Y(1)(7), Bai 
Y(1)(7), Liang H(8)(9), Hu T(8)(9), Wu Z(3)(4), Lai J(1)(7), Liu J(2), Zou 
Y(3)(9), Wei S(1)(7), Yan P(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)College of Forensic Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi, 
China.
(2)BGI Research, Kunming, China.
(3)BGI Research, Shenzhen, China.
(4)College of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
China.
(5)School of Basic Medicine, Qingdao Medical College, Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, China.
(6)School of Biology and Biological Engineering, South China University of 
Technology, Guangzhou, China.
(7)NHC Key Laboratory of Forensic Science, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi, China.
(8)BGI Research, Wuhan, China.
(9)Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Detection and Intervention of Human 
Intestinal Microbiome, BGI Research, Shenzhen, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Alcohol intake causes many diseases including neuropsychiatric symptoms, 
nutritional deficiency, progressive pancreatitis, liver cirrhosis, and ischemic 
heart disease. The gut microbiota changes significantly after alcohol exposure. 
Alcohol consumption tends to increase in underage and young people, but the 
feature of the gut microbiota in puberty remains largely unexplored. In this 
study, we conducted alcohol-exposed pubertal and adult mice model to investigate 
the intestinal damage and gut microbiota change. Interestingly, the responses of 
pubertal mice and adult mice after alcohol exposure were different. We found 
that alcohol dehydrogenase decreased and aldehyde dehydrogenase increased in the 
liver of pubertal mice, thus reducing the accumulation of toxic acetaldehyde. 
Furthermore, alcohol exposure caused less intestinal injury in pubertal mice. 
Through the analysis of metagenome assembly genome, we obtained many 
unrecognized bacterial genomes. Limosillactobacillus reuteri (cluster_56) and 
Lactobacillus intestinalis (cluster_57) were assembled from the samples of 
pubertal mice, which were involved in the production of indole acetic acid and 
the transformation of bile acids in response to alcohol exposure. This study 
provided a new insight to investigate the gut microbiota change and explained 
the difference of the gut microbiota after alcohol exposure between pubertal 
mice and adult mice.
IMPORTANCE: This study elucidates the significant impact of alcohol exposure on 
the gut microbiota and metabolic pathways in mice, highlighting the differential 
responses between adolescent and adult stages. Alcohol exposure was found to 
damage the intestinal barrier, alter the microbial composition by decreasing 
beneficial bacteria like Lactobacillus, and increase harmful bacteria such as 
Alistipes. The study also discovered unique microbial changes and resilience in 
pubertal mice. Species-level metagenomic analysis revealed specific microbial 
taxa and metabolic functions affected by alcohol. Metagenome-assembled genomes 
(MAGs) found many species that could not be annotated by conventional methods 
including many members of Lachnospiraceae, greatly expanding our understanding 
of the gut microbiota composition. These findings underscore the need for 
further research on alcohol's effects on various organs and the implications of 
microbial metabolites on disease progression.

DOI: 10.1128/msystems.01366-24
PMID: 39601556

1. Front Genet. 2024 Nov 12;15:1450064. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1450064. 
eCollection 2024.

Multi-omics insights implicate the remodeling of the intestinal structure and 
microbiome in aging.

Chen S(#)(1)(2), Wang C(#)(2), Zou X(2), Li H(2), Yang G(1)(2), Su X(2)(3), Mo 
Z(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Guangxi Medical University Cancer Hospital, Nanning, 
Guangxi, China.
(2)Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi key Laboratory for 
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Collaborative Innovation Center for 
Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, 
China.
(3)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(4)Institute of Urology and Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi 
Medical University, Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Aging can impair the ability of elderly individuals to fight 
infections and trigger persistent systemic inflammation, a condition known as 
inflammaging. However, the mechanisms underlying the development of inflammaging 
remain unknown.
METHODS: We conducted 16S rRNA sequencing of intestinal contents from young and 
old C57BL/6J mice to elucidate changes in gut microbiota diversity and microbial 
community composition after aging. Aging-related differential bacterial taxa 
were then identified, and their abundance trends were validated in human 
samples. The variances in intestinal barrier function and circulating endotoxin 
between groups were also assessed. Furthermore, widely targeted metabolomics was 
conducted to characterize metabolic profiles after aging and to investigate the 
key metabolic pathways enriched by the differential metabolites.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrated an increase in relative proportion of 
pathogenic bacteria with age, a trend also revealed in healthy populations of 
different age groups. Additionally, aging individuals exhibited reduced 
intestinal barrier function and increased circulating endotoxin levels. Widely 
targeted metabolomics revealed a significant increase in various secondary bile 
acid metabolites after aging, positively correlated with the relative abundance 
of several aging-related bacterial taxa. Furthermore, old group had lower levels 
of various anti-inflammatory or beneficial metabolites. Enrichment analysis 
identified the starch and sucrose metabolism pathway as potentially the most 
significantly impacted signaling pathway during aging.
CONCLUSION: This study aimed to provide insights into the complex interactions 
involved in organismal inflammaging through microbial multi-omics. These 
findings lay a solid foundation for future research aimed at identifying novel 
biomarkers for the clinical diagnosis of aging-related diseases or potential 
therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2024 Chen, Wang, Zou, Li, Yang, Su and Mo.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1450064
PMCID: PMC11588687
PMID: 39600316

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Nutrients. 2024 Nov 8;16(22):3840. doi: 10.3390/nu16223840.

Alteration of the Gut-Lung Axis After Severe COVID-19 Infection and Modulation 
Through Probiotics: A Randomized, Controlled Pilot Study.

Horvath A(1)(2), Habisch H(3)(4), Prietl B(1)(5), Pfeifer V(1)(5), Balazs 
I(1)(2), Kovacs G(6), Foris V(6), John N(6), Kleinschek D(7), Feldbacher 
N(1)(2), Grønbæk H(8)(9), Møller HJ(9)(10), Žukauskaitė K(2)(11), Madl T(3)(4), 
Stadlbauer V(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biomarker Research in Medicine (CBmed), Division of Translational 
Precision Medicine, Division of Precision Medicine Technologies, 8010 Graz, 
Austria.
(2)Division for Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(3)Otto Loewi Research Center, Medicinal Chemistry, Medical University of Graz, 
8010 Graz, Austria.
(4)BioTechMed-Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(5)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Medical University of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(6)Division of Pulmonology, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical University 
of Graz, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(7)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Lung Vascular Research, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(8)Departments of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Aarhus University Hospital, 
8200 Aarhus, Denmark.
(9)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark.
(10)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Aarhus University Hospital, 8200 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(11)Institute of Biosciences, Life Sciences Center, Vilnius University, 01513 
Vilnius, Lithuania.

BACKGROUND: The gut-lung axis could be a potential therapeutic target for 
improving post-acute COVID-19 symptoms, and probiotics have been proposed as 
possible modulators.
AIM: We conducted a pilot study to understand alterations in the gut-lung axis 
and to explore the effects of a probiotic in post-acute COVID-19 disease.
METHODS: We included patients after severe COVID-19 disease (sCOV, n = 21) in a 
randomized, placebo-controlled trial to test the effect of a probiotic (Pro-Vi 
5, Institute Allergosan, Graz, Austria) in a six-month intervention and used 
patients after mild disease (mCOV, n = 10) as controls, to compare the 
intestinal microbiome, metabolome, and patient-reported outcomes and biomarkers 
along the gut-lung axis at baseline and throughout probiotic intervention.
RESULTS: Compared to mCOV patients, sCOV patients showed lower microbial 
richness, which was significantly improved by probiotic intervention. A 
reorganization of Ruminococcaceae and Lachnospiraceae taxa was observed in sCOV 
patients but remained unaffected by the intervention. Serum metabolome showed a 
dysregulation of lipoproteins in accordance with higher BMI and comorbidities in 
sCOV patients. HDL and LDL fractions/components were temporarily decreased in 
the probiotic group. Stool metabolome was altered at baseline in sCOV patients 
and an increase in L-DOPA after 3 months and butyrate after 6 months of 
intervention could be observed. Probiotics partially improved reduced quality of 
life and modulated altered immune responses in sCOV patients. Increased 
intestinal permeability at baseline remained unaffected.
CONCLUSION: The study provides evidence of long-term alterations of the gut-lung 
axis after severe COVID-19 infection and suggests that probiotics can modulate 
the biomarkers of the gut-lung axis.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16223840
PMCID: PMC11597208
PMID: 39599626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Angela Horvath and Vanessa Stadlbauer have 
received research grants, other research support, and/or speaker honoraria from 
the Institute Allergosan and Winclove Probiotics.

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Nov 18;13(22):6938. doi: 10.3390/jcm13226938.

Gut Microbial Taxonomy and Its Role as a Biomarker in Aortic Diseases: A 
Systematic Review and Future Perspectives.

Neiroukh D(1)(2), Hajdarpasic A(3), Ayhan C(1)(2), Sultan S(2)(4)(5), Soliman 
O(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Cardiology, School of Medicine, University of Galway, H91 TK33 
Galway, Ireland.
(2)CORRIB-CURAM-Vascular Group, University of Galway, H91 TK33 Galway, Ireland.
(3)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Sarajevo Medical School, 
University Sarajevo School of Science and Technology, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.
(4)Western Vascular Institute, Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, 
University Hospital Galway, University of Galway, H91 TK33 Galway, Ireland.
(5)Department of Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Surgery, Galway Clinic, Royal 
College of Surgeons in Ireland, Galway Affiliated Hospital, H91 HHT0 Galway, 
Ireland.
(6)Euro Heart Foundation, 3071 Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Background/Objectives: Evidence of the association between the gut microbiome 
and cardiovascular diseases has accumulated. An imbalance or dysbiosis of this 
system has been shown to play a role in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular 
events, including aortic diseases. We aimed to elucidate the findings of the gut 
microbial taxonomy associated with aortic diseases and their subtypes. 
Furthermore, we sought to investigate whether gut microbiome dysbiosis can be 
used as a biomarker for aortic disease detection and to identify which species 
can be disease-specific. Methods: A systematic search was conducted using the 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) 
guidelines for original research papers on gut microbiome composition in 
patients with aortic disease, using patients without aortic disease as the 
control (i.e., healthy controls). The databases PubMed, Scopus, Cochrane, and 
Web of Science were used by employing the medical subject headings (MeSH) terms 
"aortic diseases", "microbiome"," microbiota", and "taxa" before August 2024. We 
extracted the study characteristics, study population, and gut microbiome in 
aortic disease, including microbiota taxa diversity and abundance, regardless of 
taxa level. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Quality Assessment Tool was 
used to assess study quality. Data were synthesized narratively to address the 
heterogeneity of the studies. Results: In this review, twelve studies that have 
identified gut microbial species and their potential impact on aortic disease 
pathogenesis were included. The studies showed the phyla dominance of Bacillota, 
Pseudomonadota, Actinomycetota, Bacteroidota, and Euryarchaeota in aortic 
disease patients. We also included the taxa sequencing methods and those used to 
extract the microorganisms. Aortic diseases were categorized into Takayasu's 
arteritis, giant cell arteritis, aortic aneurysm, and aortic dissection. Aortic 
disease patients had a higher rate of dysbiosis when compared to the healthy 
control groups, with significantly different microbiome composition. 
Conclusions: Patients with aortic disease exhibit a distinct difference between 
their gut microbiota composition and that of the healthy controls, which 
suggests a potential biomarker role of gut dysbiosis. Further exploration of the 
microbiome and its metagenome interface can help identify its role in aortic 
disease pathogenesis in depth, generating future therapeutic options. However, a 
unified methodology is required to identify potential microbial biomarkers in 
cardiovascular and cardiometabolic diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13226938
PMCID: PMC11594723
PMID: 39598083

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Nov 20;12(11):2376. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12112376.

Anthocyanin-Rich Extract Mitigates the Contribution of the Pathobiont Genus 
Haemophilus in Mild-to-Moderate Ulcerative Colitis Patients.

Zobrist Y(1), Doulberis M(2)(3)(4), Biedermann L(2), Leventhal GE(5), Rogler 
G(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Zurich, 8006 Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Zurich 
University Hospital, 8091 Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Gastroklinik, Private Gastroenterological Practice, 8810 Horgen, Switzerland.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical University Department, 
Kantonsspital Aarau, 5001 Aarau, Switzerland.
(5)PharmaBiome AG, 8952 Schlieren, Switzerland.

Anthocyanins (ACs) have been shown to elicit anti-inflammatory and antioxidant 
effects in animal models of ulcerative colitis (UC). Furthermore, we previously 
observed in a double-blind randomized trial in UC patients that biochemical 
disease activity tended to be lower in patients that were exposed to AC. Here, 
we report on the changes in the fecal microbiome composition in these patients 
upon AC exposure. UC patients received a 3 g daily dose of an AC-rich bilberry 
extract (ACRE) for eight weeks. We determined the microbiome composition in 
longitudinal stool samples from 24 patients and quantified the degree of change 
over time. We also correlated the relative abundances of individual microbial 
taxa at different timepoints to fecal concentrations of calprotectin, a proxy 
for inflammation. Microbiome composition did not change over time as a result of 
the intervention, in terms of both alpha and beta diversity. However, before the 
intervention, the abundance of Haemophilus parainfluenzae was positively 
correlated with fecal calprotectin concentrations, and this correlation 
persisted in placebo-treated subjects throughout the study. In contrast, the 
correlation between H. parainfluenzae and calprotectin vanished in ACRE-treated 
subjects, while the relative abundance of H. parainfluenzae did not change. Our 
results suggest that ACRE treatment mitigates the contribution of H. 
parainfluenzae to inflammation. Further research is warranted to better 
comprehend the role of microbial composition in response to medical therapy 
including AC-rich extract in UC patients.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12112376
PMCID: PMC11596099
PMID: 39597764

Conflict of interest statement: M.D. reports traveling fees from Takeda, FALK, 
and Abbvie as well as consulting fees from Takeda. L.B. reports fees for 
consulting/advisory board from Abbvie, MSD, Vifor, Falk, Esocap, Calypso, 
Ferring, Pfizer, Shire, Takeda, Janssen, and Ewopharma. G.R. declares consulting 
fees from Abbvie, Augurix, BMS, Boehringer, Calypso, Celgene, FALK, Ferring, 
Fisher, Genentech, Gilead, Janssen, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Phadia, Roche, UCB, 
Takeda, Tillots, Vifor, Vital Solutions, and Zeller; speaker’s honoraria from 
Astra Zeneca, Abbvie, FALK, Janssen, MSD, Pfizer, Phadia, Takeda, Tillots, UCB, 
Vifor, and Zeller; and grant support from Abbvie, Ardeypharm, Augurix, Calypso, 
FALK, Flamentera, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Takeda, Tillots, UCB, and 
Zeller. G.E.L. is an employee and shareholder of PharmaBiome. All other authors 
declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Nov 10;12(11):2281. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12112281.

Unveiling Emerging Opportunistic Fish Pathogens in Aquaculture: A Comprehensive 
Seasonal Study of Microbial Composition in Mediterranean Fish Hatcheries.

Skliros D(1), Kostakou M(1)(2), Kokkari C(3), Tsertou MI(3), Pavloudi C(4), 
Zafeiropoulos H(5), Katharios P(3), Flemetakis E(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Department of Biotechnology, School of 
Applied Biology and Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, 11855 
Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Applied Microbial Ecology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental 
Research-UFZ, 04318 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Institute of Marine Biology, Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Hellenic Centre 
for Marine Research, 71500 Heraklion, Greece.
(4)European Marine Biological Resource Centre-European Research Infrastructure 
Consortium (EMBRC-ERIC), 75252 Paris, France.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Bacteriology, Department of Microbiology, Immunology 
and Transplantation, Rega Institute for Medical Research, KU Leuven, 3000 
Leuven, Belgium.

The importance of microbial communities in fish hatcheries for fish health and 
welfare has been recognized, with several studies mapping these communities 
during healthy rearing conditions and disease outbreaks. In this study, we 
analyzed the bacteriome of the live feeds, such as microalgae, rotifers, and 
Artemia, used in fish hatcheries that produce Mediterranean species. Our goal 
was to provide baseline information about their structure, emphasizing in 
environmental putative fish pathogenic bacteria. We conducted 16S rRNA amplicon 
Novaseq sequencing for our analysis, and we inferred 46,745 taxonomically 
annotated ASVs. Results showed that incoming environmental water plays a 
significant role in the presence of important taxa that constitute presumptive 
pathogens. Bio-statistical analyses revealed a relatively stable bacteriome 
among seasonal samplings for every hatchery but a diverse bacteriome between 
sampling stations and a distinct core bacteriome for each hatchery. Analysis of 
putative opportunistic fish pathogenic genera revealed some co-occurrence 
correlation events and a high average relative abundance of Vibrio, 
Tenacibaculum, and Photobacterium genera in live feeds, reaching a grand mean 
average of up to 7.3% for the hatchery of the Hellenic Center of Marine Research 
(HCMR), 12% for Hatchery A, and 11.5% for Hatchery B. Mapping the bacteriome in 
live feeds is pivotal for understanding the marine environment and distinct 
aquaculture practices and can guide improvements in hatchery management, 
enhancing fish health and sustainability in the Mediterranean region.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12112281
PMCID: PMC11596916
PMID: 39597671

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Oct 23;12(11):2119. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12112119.

Effect of the 16S rRNA Gene Hypervariable Region on the Microbiome Taxonomic 
Profile and Diversity in the Endangered Fish Totoaba macdonaldi.

Pérez-Bustamante IS(1), Cruz-Flores R(1), López-Carvallo JA(2), Sánchez-Serrano 
S(3).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación Superior de Ensenada 
(CICESE), Carretera Ensenada-Tijuana No. 3918, Zona Playitas, Ensenada 22860, 
Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Fisiología y Genética Marina, Departamento de Acuicultura, 
Facultad de Ciencias del Mar, Universidad Católica del Norte (UCN), Coquimbo 
1781421, Chile.
(3)Facultad de Ciencias Marinas, Universidad Autónoma de Baja California (UABC), 
Ensenada 22860, Mexico.

Understanding the intricate dynamics of fish microbiota through 16S rRNA 
amplicon sequencing is pivotal for ecological insights and effective disease 
management. However, this approach faces challenges including the 
co-amplification of host mitochondrial sequences and the variability in 
bacterial composition influenced by the selected 16S rRNA gene regions. To 
overcome these limitations, we conducted a comprehensive investigation to 
identify the most suitable 16S rRNA region for bacterial microbial analysis in 
endangered fish Totoaba macdonaldi, an endemic species of significant ecological 
and economic importance in Mexico. Targeting four distinct hypervariable regions 
(V1-V2, V2-V3, V3-V4, and V5-V7) of the 16S rRNA gene, we determined the 
microbial composition within the distal intestine. A total of 40 microbiomes 
were sequenced. Our findings underscore the critical impact of region selection 
on the accuracy of microbiota analysis. The V3-V4 region detected the highest 
number of bacterial taxa and exhibited significantly higher alpha diversity 
indices, demonstrating the highest taxonomic resolution. This study emphasizes 
the necessity of meticulous 16S rRNA region selection for fish microbiota 
analysis, particularly in native species of ecological and economic significance 
such as the endangered T. macdonaldi, where information is limited. Such 
optimization enhances the reliability and applicability of microbiota studies in 
fisheries management and conservation efforts.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12112119
PMCID: PMC11596169
PMID: 39597509

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Nov 17;25(22):12337. doi: 10.3390/ijms252212337.

The Oral Microbiota, Microbial Metabolites, and Immuno-Inflammatory Mechanisms 
in Cardiovascular Disease.

Wang Z(1), Kaplan RC(1)(2), Burk RD(1)(3)(4)(5), Qi Q(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(2)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, 
Seattle, WA 98109, USA.
(3)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein 
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461, USA.
(6)Department of Nutrition, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

Cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) remain a leading cause of global morbidity and 
mortality. Recent advancements in high-throughput omics techniques have enhanced 
our understanding of the human microbiome's role in the development of CVDs. 
Although the relationship between the gut microbiome and CVDs has attracted 
considerable research attention and has been rapidly evolving in recent years, 
the role of the oral microbiome remains less understood, with most prior studies 
focusing on periodontitis-related pathogens. In this review, we summarized 
previously reported associations between the oral microbiome and CVD, 
highlighting known CVD-associated taxa such as Porphyromonas gingivalis, 
Fusobacterium nucleatum, and Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans. We also 
discussed the interactions between the oral and gut microbes. The potential 
mechanisms by which the oral microbiota can influence CVD development include 
oral and systemic inflammation, immune responses, cytokine release, 
translocation of oral bacteria into the bloodstream, and the impact of 
microbial-related products such as microbial metabolites (e.g., short-chain 
fatty acids [SCFAs], trimethylamine oxide [TMAO], hydrogen sulfide [H2S], nitric 
oxide [NO]) and specific toxins (e.g., lipopolysaccharide [LPS], leukotoxin 
[LtxA]). The processes driven by these mechanisms may contribute to 
atherosclerosis, endothelial dysfunction, and other cardiovascular pathologies. 
Integrated multi-omics methodologies, along with large-scale longitudinal 
population studies and intervention studies, will facilitate a deeper 
understanding of the metabolic and functional roles of the oral microbiome in 
cardiovascular health. This fundamental knowledge will support the development 
of targeted interventions and effective therapies to prevent or reduce the 
progression from cardiovascular risk to clinical CVD events.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252212337
PMCID: PMC11594421
PMID: 39596404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2024 Nov 13;14(22):2536. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics14222536.

Utilizing Artificial Intelligence for Microbiome Decision-Making: Autism 
Spectrum Disorder in Children from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Bašić-Čičak D(1), Hasić Telalović J(1), Pašić L(2).

Author information:
(1)Computer Science Department, University Sarajevo School of Science and 
Technology, Hrasnička cesta 3a, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(2)Sarajevo Medical School, University Sarajevo School of Science and 
Technology, Hrasnička cesta 3a, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The study of microbiome composition shows positive 
indications for application in the diagnosis and treatment of many conditions 
and diseases. One such condition is autism spectrum disorder (ASD). We aimed to 
analyze gut microbiome samples from children in Bosnia and Herzegovina to 
identify microbial differences between neurotypical children and those with ASD. 
Additionally, we developed machine learning classifiers to differentiate between 
the two groups using microbial abundance and predicted functional pathways.
METHODS: A total of 60 gut microbiome samples (16S rRNA sequences) were 
analyzed, with 44 from children with ASD and 16 from neurotypical children. Four 
machine learning algorithms (Random Forest, Support Vector Classification, 
Gradient Boosting, and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier) were applied to 
create eight classification models based on bacterial abundance at the genus 
level and KEGG pathways. Model accuracy was evaluated, and an external dataset 
was introduced to test model generalizability.
RESULTS: The highest classification accuracy (80%) was achieved with Random 
Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier using genus-level taxa. The 
Random Forest model also performed well (78%) with KEGG pathways. When tested on 
an independent dataset, the model maintained high accuracy (79%), confirming its 
generalizability.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified significant microbial differences between 
neurotypical children and children with ASD. Machine learning classifiers, 
particularly Random Forest and Extremely Randomized Tree Classifier, achieved 
strong accuracy. Validation with external data demonstrated that the models 
could generalize across different datasets, highlighting their potential use.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics14222536
PMCID: PMC11592508
PMID: 39594202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2024 Nov 15;10(11):792. doi: 10.3390/jof10110792.

Response of the Endophytic Microbiome in Cotinus coggygria Roots to Verticillium 
Wilt Infection.

Cheng Y(1)(2), Zhao J(2), Liu Y(2), Zhang T(2), Hsiang T(3), Yu Z(1), Qin W(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Yangtze University, Jingzhou 434025, China.
(2)Institute of Plant Protection, Beijing Key Laboratory of Environment Friendly 
Management on Fruit Diseases and Pests in North China, Beijing Academy of 
Agriculture and Forestry Sciences, Beijing 100097, China.
(3)School of Environmental Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, 
Canada.

Verticillium wilt caused by Verticillium dahliae Kleb. is a lethal soil-borne 
fungal disease of Cotinus coggygria. The plant endophytic microbiome plays an 
important role in maintaining plant health and disease resistance, but it is 
unclear how the endophytic microbiome of C. coggygria roots varies in response 
to Verticillium wilt occurrence. In this study, the endophytic microbial 
diversity, community composition, dominant species, and co-occurrence network of 
C. coggygria under Verticillium wilt-affected and healthy conditions were 
assessed using Illumina sequencing. Compared with healthy plants, the bacterial 
alpha diversity indices of Verticillium wilt-affected plants decreased 
significantly, while the fungal alpha diversity indices showed obvious 
increases. The relative abundance of dominant taxa including Proteobacteria, 
Actinobacteriota, Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota at the phylum level, as well as 
Gammaproteobacteria, Thermoleophilia, Dothideomycetes, and Agaricomycetes at the 
class level, differed significantly between Verticillium wilt-affected and 
healthy plants. Co-occurrence networks revealed that the fungal network of 
Verticillium wilt-affected roots was denser with more negative interactions, 
which may be relevant to functional changes from reciprocity to competition in 
the microbial community, in response to V. dahliae infection. The results 
enhanced our understanding on the relationships between the endophytic 
microbiome and Verticillium wilt, which could provide information for the 
management of this disease in C. coggygria.

DOI: 10.3390/jof10110792
PMCID: PMC11595824
PMID: 39590711

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2024 Nov 6;10(11):771. doi: 10.3390/jof10110771.

Biocontrol Agents Inhibit Banana Fusarium Wilt and Alter the Rooted Soil 
Bacterial Community in the Field.

Du C(1), Yang D(1), Jiang S(1), Zhang J(1), Ye Y(2), Pan L(1), Fu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Plant Protection Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences/Guangxi Key Laboratory of Biology for Crop Diseases and Insect 
Pests/Key Laboratory of Green Prevention and Control on Fruits and Vegetables in 
South China Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Nanning 530007, China.
(2)Horticultural Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
Nanning 530007, China.

Banana is an important fruit and food crop in tropical and subtropical regions 
worldwide. Banana production is seriously threatened by Fusarium wilt of banana 
(FWB), a disease caused by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. cubense, and biological 
control is an important means of curbing this soil-borne disease. To reveal the 
effects of biocontrol agents on inhibiting FWB and altering the soil bacterial 
community under natural ecosystems, we conducted experiments at a banana 
plantation. The control efficiency of a compound microbial agent (CM), 
Paenibacillus polymyxa (PP), Trichoderma harzianum (TH), and carbendazim (CA) on 
this disease were compared in the field. Meanwhile, the alterations in structure 
and function of the rooted soil bacterial community in different treatments 
during the vigorous growth and fruit development stages of banana were analyzed 
by microbiomics method. The results confirmed that the different biocontrol 
agents could effectively control FWB. In particular, CM significantly reduced 
the incidence of the disease and showed a field control efficiency of 60.53%. In 
terms of bacterial community, there were no significant differences in the 
richness and diversity of banana rooted soil bacteria among the different 
treatments at either growth stage, but their relative abundances differed 
substantially. CM treatment significantly increased the ratios of Bacillus, 
Bryobacter, Pseudomonas, Jatrophihabitans, Hathewaya, and Chujaibacter in the 
vigorous growth stage and Jatrophihabitans, Occallatibacter, Cupriavidus, and 
1921-3 in the fruit development stage. Furthermore, bacterial community function 
in the banana rooted soil was affected differently by the various biocontrol 
agents. CM application increased the relative abundance of multiple soil 
bacterial functions, including carbohydrate metabolism, xenobiotic 
biodegradation and metabolism, terpenoid and polyketide metabolism, lipid 
metabolism, and metabolism of other amino acids. In summary, our results suggest 
that the tested biocontrol agents can effectively inhibit the occurrence of 
banana Fusarium wilt and alter the soil bacterial community in the field. They 
mainly modified the relative abundance of bacterial taxa and the metabolic 
functions rather than the richness and diversity. These findings provide a 
scientific basis for the use of biocontrol agents to control banana Fusarium 
wilt under field conditions, which serves as a reference for the study of the 
soil microbiological mechanisms of other biocontrol agents.

DOI: 10.3390/jof10110771
PMCID: PMC11595440
PMID: 39590690

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2024 Nov 2;10(11):763. doi: 10.3390/jof10110763.

Diversity of Pleosporalean Fungi Isolated from Rice (Oryza sativa L.) in 
Northern Thailand and Descriptions of Five New Species.

Absalan S(1)(2), Armand A(2)(3), Jayawardena RS(2)(3), McKenzie EHC(4), Hyde 
KD(2), Lumyong S(1)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 
50200, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence in Fungal Research, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai 
57100, Thailand.
(3)School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai 57100, Thailand.
(4)Landcare Research-Manaaki Whenua, Private Bag 92170, Auckland 1072, New 
Zealand.
(5)Academy of Science, The Royal Society of Thailand, Bangkok 10300, Thailand.
(6)Center of Excellence in Microbial Diversity and Sustainable Utilization, 
Faculty of Science, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.

Pleosporales represents the largest order within the class Dothideomycetes 
(Fungi), comprising phytopathogenic, saprobic, and endophytic taxa with a 
widespread presence in terrestrial and aquatic environments. Rice (Oryza sativa) 
is a primary economic crop in numerous tropical countries, particularly in 
Thailand. Studying fungal species associated with rice holds the potential to 
enhance our understanding of fungal diversity, lifestyles, and biology of rice, 
offering valuable insights for future research aimed at disease management and 
yield improvement. Thirty-nine pleosporalean isolates were obtained from various 
parts of rice plants collected across diverse regions in Chiang Rai Province, 
Thailand. Species identification involved a combination of morphology and 
molecular phylogeny, utilizing multi-locus sequence analyses of the ITS, LSU, 
SSU, gapdh, rpb2, tef1, and tub2 genes. The isolates were identified in 18 taxa 
distributed across five families and ten genera, including five new species 
(Bipolaris chiangraiensis, Ophiosphaerella oryzae, Paraphaeosphaeria oryzae, 
Pyrenochaetopsis oryzicola, and Setophoma oryzicola). Additionally, six new host 
records and two new geographical records are documented. Photoplates, detailed 
morphological descriptions, and phylogenetic trees are provided to elucidate the 
placement of both known and novel taxa.

DOI: 10.3390/jof10110763
PMCID: PMC11595767
PMID: 39590682

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Cureus. 2024 Oct 24;16(10):e72268. doi: 10.7759/cureus.72268. eCollection 2024
 Oct.

Pilots, Astronauts, and the Aerospace Microbiota: A Narrative Review of 
Occupational Impact.

Minoretti P(1), Fontana JM(2), Yilmaz Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Occupational Health, Studio Minoretti, Oggiono, ITA.
(2)Biotechnology, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Verbania, ITA.
(3)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan University, Rize, TUR.

The human microbiota plays a crucial role in maintaining health and preventing 
disease; however, the effects of occupational exposure on the microbiota of 
aircrew and astronauts are not fully understood. This narrative review aims to 
synthesize the current knowledge on microbiota alterations in aerospace 
medicine, assess the potential of probiotics as a countermeasure, and identify 
key gaps that warrant further research. The references were identified through 
searching PubMed for English articles published between 2010 and 2024, using 
keywords related to microbiota, probiotics, aviation, spaceflight, pilots, and 
astronauts. Additionally, the bibliographies of relevant papers were reviewed. 
Studies in aerospace medicine were selected based on their focus on the 
occupational impact on microbiota and the use of probiotics in this context. For 
aircrew, initial studies indicate a decrease in beneficial gut bacteria, 
suggesting that probiotics could enhance gastrointestinal health, immunity, and 
overall well-being. However, unsupervised use of probiotics carries potential 
risks. Conversely, spaceflight induces significant changes in the gut, skin, 
oral, and nasal microbiota of astronauts, characterized by altered diversity and 
abundance of specific microbial taxa. These changes include a relative decrease 
in the abundance of beneficial gut bacteria, an increase in opportunistic 
pathogens, and evidence of microbial transfer between astronauts and spacecraft 
surfaces. While simulated space studies suggest the potential for probiotics to 
mitigate dysbiosis, direct testing done during actual spaceflight is lacking. 
The observed microbiota changes during spaceflight are associated with various 
health implications, including alterations in metabolic pathways and 
interactions between the microbial metabolic capabilities and the host's 
metabolism. In conclusion, this review highlights the profound impact of 
spaceflight on astronaut microbiota and the promising role of probiotics as an 
intervention in both space and aviation medicine. However, significant research 
gaps remain. These include elucidating the functional implications of microbial 
shifts, developing personalized countermeasures, and validating the efficacy of 
probiotics during spaceflight. Future studies should leverage advanced tools 
such as metagenomic analysis and longitudinal tracking of astronaut health to 
inform targeted interventions that support the well-being of aerospace 
personnel. Integrating data across different sites of the body and missions, 
facilitated by resources like the Space Omics and Medical Atlas (SOMA), can help 
identify consistent microbial changes induced by the unique occupational 
conditions of spaceflight and aviation. This integrated approach will be crucial 
for developing effective microbiota-based countermeasures to mitigate the 
occupational health risks associated with space and aviation.

Copyright © 2024, Minoretti et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.72268
PMCID: PMC11585399
PMID: 39583430

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.

1. J Ginseng Res. 2024 Nov;48(6):581-591. doi: 10.1016/j.jgr.2024.08.001. Epub
2024  Aug 9.

Korean Red Ginseng alleviates dextran sodium sulfate-induced colitis through gut 
microbiota modulation in mice.

Jeong JS(1), Baek GH(2), Kim JW(1), Kim JH(1), Chung EH(1), Ko JW(1), Kwon 
MJ(3), Kim SK(3), Lee SH(3), Kim JS(2)(4), Kim TW(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 FOUR Program), Chungnam National 
University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Nano-Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon, 
Republic of Korea.
(3)R&D Headquarters, Korea Ginseng Corporation, Gwacheon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Institute for New Drug Development, College of Life Science and 
Bioengineering, Incheon National University, Incheon, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: There is a growing interest in understanding the association between 
the gut microbiota and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Natural compounds, such 
as Korean Red Ginseng (KRG), show promise for IBD treatment because of their 
ability to influence gut microbiota. This study explored the effects of KRG on 
gut microbiota modulation and subsequent intestinal epithelial cell regeneration 
in an experimental colitis model.
METHOD: Using a mouse model of colitis induced by 2 % dextran sodium sulfate, 
the study administered 200 or 400 mg/kg/day of KRG to evaluate its biological 
effects. Colitis symptoms were assessed through body weight, disease activity 
index, colon length, and histological analysis. The microbial composition in the 
fecal was determined using 16S rRNA sequencing. To evaluate regeneration signals 
in the colon, western blotting and immunohistochemistry assays were conducted.
RESULT: Administration of KRG effectively mitigated colitis symptoms in mice, as 
indicated by histological examination showing alleviated epithelial damage and 
inflammation, along with increased mucus production. Microbiota analysis showed 
that KRG significantly altered microbial diversity, favoring beneficial taxa and 
suppressing harmful taxa. Moreover, ameliorated β-catenin/transcription factor-4 
protein expression, a key signal associated with epithelial cell regeneration, 
was observed in the KRG treated groups, accompanied by improved intestinal 
linings.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that KRG exerts biological effects in colitis 
by modulating gut microbiota and creating a favorable intestinal environment, 
thereby reducing regenerative signals. Further research is warranted to 
elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the interaction of 
KRG with gut microbiota and pave the way for effective IBD therapies.

© 2024 The Korean Society of Ginseng. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jgr.2024.08.001
PMCID: PMC11584195
PMID: 39583173

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no known 
competing conflict of interest.

1. NPJ Biofilms Microbiomes. 2024 Nov 24;10(1):135. doi: 
10.1038/s41522-024-00612-7.

NMFGOT: a multi-view learning framework for the microbiome and metabolome 
integrative analysis with optimal transport plan.

Ma Y(1)(2), Liu L(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Engineering, Hubei University of Arts and Science, 
Xiangyang, Hubei, China. chonghua_1983@126.com.
(2)Hubei Key Laboratory of Power System Design and Test for Electrical Vehicle, 
Hubei University of Arts and Science, Xiangyang, China. chonghua_1983@126.com.
(3)School of Physics and Electronic Engineering, Hubei University of Arts and 
Science, Xiangyang, Hubei, China.

The rapid development of high-throughput sequencing techniques provides an 
unprecedented opportunity to generate biological insights into 
microbiome-related diseases. However, the relationships among microbes, 
metabolites and human microenvironment are extremely complex, making data 
analysis challenging. Here, we present NMFGOT, which is a versatile toolkit for 
the integrative analysis of microbiome and metabolome data from the same 
samples. NMFGOT is an unsupervised learning framework based on nonnegative 
matrix factorization with graph regularized optimal transport, where it utilizes 
the optimal transport plan to measure the probability distance between 
microbiome samples, which better dealt with the nonlinear high-order 
interactions among microbial taxa and metabolites. Moreover, it also includes a 
spatial regularization term to preserve the spatial consistency of samples in 
the embedding space across different data modalities. We implemented NMFGOT in 
several multi-omics microbiome datasets from multiple cohorts. The experimental 
results showed that NMFGOT consistently performed well compared with several 
recently published multi-omics integrating methods. Moreover, NMFGOT also 
facilitates downstream biological analysis, including pathway enrichment 
analysis and disease-specific metabolite-microbe association analysis. Using 
NMFGOT, we identified the significantly and stable metabolite-microbe 
associations in GC and ESRD diseases, which improves our understanding for the 
mechanisms of human complex diseases.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41522-024-00612-7
PMCID: PMC11586431
PMID: 39582023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 23;14(1):29063. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-80516-w.

Association between gut microbiota and acute upper respiratory tract infection: 
a Mendelian randomization study.

Li Y(1), Chen G(1), Chen K(2), Li W(1), Chen Y(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Guizhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Guiyang, 550025, China.
(2)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Affiliated Rehabilitation Hospital of 
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, 400050, China.
(3)School of Basic Medicine, Guizhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Guiyang, 550025, China. chenyunzhi270@gzy.edu.cn.

Targeting specific gut microbiota (GM) species to prevent and treat acute upper 
respiratory tract infection (AURTI) has attracted researchers' attention, but 
the relationship between the two is unclear. Based on the summary data from 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on GM and five types of AURTIs (acute 
nasopharyngitis (common cold), acute pharyngitis, acute sinusitis, acute upper 
respiratory infections, and acute upper respiratory infections of multiple and 
unspecified sites), we performed two-sample bidirectional Mendelian 
randomization (MR) to assess the causal relationship. Through inverse variance 
weighting (IVW) method, we found that 33 potential microbial taxa can influence 
the occurrence of AURTI. Sensitivity analysis showed no potential horizontal 
pleiotropy and heterogeneity bias. We further employed multivariable Mendelian 
randomization to investigate the impact of potential interference factors on the 
significant associations previously identified, considering aspects such as 
comorbidities associated with AURTI, seasonal variations, pathogen specificity, 
and history of antibiotic allergies. Ultimately, 11 microbial taxa remained 
significantly associated. This study provides robust evidence for a causal 
relationship between GM and five types of AURTIs, thereby offering a foundation 
for the development of microbiota-targeted therapies and related probiotic 
interventions aimed at AURTI.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-80516-w
PMCID: PMC11585582
PMID: 39580552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors 
declare no competing interests.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Nov 23;24(1):492. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03658-x.

Interpretation of bacterial composition patterns and community assembly 
processes in the rhizosphere soil of tea trees in karst areas.

Zhao Y(1)(2), Zhang N(1)(2), Chen J(1)(2), Ran W(1)(2), Zhao Z(1)(2), Song 
Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Karst Science, Guizhou Normal University, Guiyang, 550001, China.
(2)State Engineering Technology Institute for Karst Desertification Control, 
Guiyang, 550001, China.
(3)School of Karst Science, Guizhou Normal University, Guiyang, 550001, China. 
songyuehua@163.com.
(4)State Engineering Technology Institute for Karst Desertification Control, 
Guiyang, 550001, China. songyuehua@163.com.

RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Soil microorganisms that are closely related to 
plants are important factors affecting plant health. Therefore, elucidating the 
abundant and rare bacterial species in soil associated with plant diseases is 
crucial for understanding ecological processes, maintaining the stability of 
microecological environments, and formulating microbial strategies that are 
consistent with modern agricultural development.
RESULTS: Tea leaf blight leads to an increase in bacterial diversity in the 
rhizosphere. Random processes dominate the assembly of abundant and rare taxa, 
while abundant taxa are also influenced by deterministic processes. In the 
co-occurrence network, the increase in bacterial community diversity mediated by 
tea cloud leaf blight enhances the stability of the network. Meanwhile, the 
proportion of positive correlation between rare taxa is relatively high, and the 
relationship between rare taxa and intermediate taxa is closer. This highly 
diverse bacteria community maintained the structure and stability of the 
community to a certain extent.
CONCLUSION: The rare taxa in the rhizosphere and the rhizosphere bacterial 
community mediated by tea leaf blight have high diversity, which is of great 
significance for maintaining the stability of the rhizosphere bacterial 
ecological network. In the future, we will further explore the dynamic changes 
and interaction patterns of the species in the rhizosphere soil affected by tea 
tree diseases, and their ecological functions and importance in areas of habitat 
fragmentation. Overall, there are many microbial resources in the rhizosphere 
microbiota under the influence of plant diseases that can be used for 
agricultural practice. The results of this study will enrich the insights into 
ecodynamics of bacteria in karst areas, especially in karst tea gardens.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03658-x
PMCID: PMC11585092
PMID: 39578749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: The source of experimental samples is collection, and the samples 
collected in the experiment have obtained permission from the tea garden 
managers. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The 
authors declare no competing interests.

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2024 Nov 21;24(1):1331. doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-10233-2.

Characterization of oral microbiota of children with hand, foot, and mouth 
disease caused by enterovirus A 71.

Shen N(#)(1), Wu R(#)(1), Lu T(#)(1), Jiang Y(1), Ning T(1), Liu S(1), Liu X(1), 
Zhu S(2), Qiao J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical 
University, Suqian, Jiangsu, 223800, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical 
University, Suqian, Jiangsu, 223800, People's Republic of China. 
zsyzsy7878@163.com.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical 
University, Suqian, Jiangsu, 223800, People's Republic of China. 826457@qq.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The association between alterations in the oral microbiome and hand, 
foot, and mouth disease (HFMD) has been observed in previous studies. Our study, 
therefore, aimed to identify the structural changes in the oral microbiota and 
biomarkers in children with HFMD caused by enterovirus A 71 (EV-A71).
METHODS: Children diagnosed with EV-A71 HFMD and healthy children recruited from 
April 2021 to September 2023 were included in the present study, and were 
categorized into EV-A71 and control groups, respectively. Oral swabs were 
collected and microbiota information was obtained using 16 S rRNA gene 
sequencing technology. Alpha-diversity and partial least squares discriminant 
analyses were conducted to compare microbial diversity, richness, and similarity 
between the two groups. Linear discriminant analysis effect size was employed to 
identify microbial taxa with significant differences, and determined the key 
genera among them.
RESULTS: The study included a total of 80 children, with 50 assigned to the 
EV-A71 group and 30 to the control group. No significant differences were found 
between the two groups in terms of age (2.2 ± 1.2 vs. 2.7 ± 1.2 years; age 
range: 1-5 years; P = 0.114) or sex (56% vs. 60% boys, P = 0.726). The oral 
microbiota structure in the EV-A71 group differed from that in the control 
group. The EV-A71 group showed significant reductions in both the Shannon index 
(P = 0.037) and the abundance-based coverage estimator (ACE) index (P < 0.001). 
The key genus changes were marked by a significant decrease in the abundance of 
Capnocytophaga (P = 0.002) and Leptotrichia (P = 0.033) in the EV-A71 group.
CONCLUSION: In children with EV-A71 HFMD, the oral microbiota showed changes in 
composition, with a significant reduction in diversity and richness. The changes 
in key genera were a marked decrease in the abundance of Capnocytophaga and 
Leptotrichia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-024-10233-2
PMCID: PMC11583527
PMID: 39574007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics committee approval and 
consent to participate: The parents or guardians of the children included in the 
present study provided informed consent, and the study design was approved by 
the ethics committee of Suqian Hospital Affiliated to Xuzhou Medical University 
(June 14, 2020). All experiments were performed in accordance with guidelines of 
the Declaration of Helsinki (2013). Consent for publication: Not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2024 Nov 20:gfae266. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfae266. Online
 ahead of print.

Oral dysbiosis initiates periodontal disease in experimental kidney disease.

Randall D(1), Alsam A(2), Kieswich J(1), Joseph S(2), Aduse-Opoku J(2), Swann 
J(3), Boyde A(4), Davis G(4), Mills D(4), McCafferty K(1), Curtis M(2), Yaqoob 
MM(1).

Author information:
(1)William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, 
Charterhouse Square, London.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, King's College London, 
Guy's Tower Wing, Great Maze Pond, London.
(3)School of Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Southampton, Southampton.
(4)Dental physical sciences unit, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End 
Campus, London.

BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS: It is presently unclear why there is a high 
prevalence of periodontal disease in individuals living with chronic kidney 
disease (CKD). Whilst some have argued that periodontal disease causes CKD, we 
hypothesised that alterations in saliva and the oral microenvironment in 
organisms with kidney disease may initiate periodontal disease by causing 
dysbiosis of the oral microbiota.
METHODS: Experimental kidney disease was created using adenine feeding and 
subtotal nephrectomy in rats, and by adenine feeding in mice. Loss of 
periodontal bone height was assessed using a dissecting microscope supported by 
micro-CT, light, confocal and electron microscopy, and immunohistochemistry. 
Salivary biochemistry was assessed using NMR spectroscopy. The oral microbiome 
was evaluated using culture-based and molecular methods, and the 
transmissibility of dysbiosis was assessed using co-caging and microbial 
transfer experiments into previously germ-free recipient mice.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that experimental kidney disease causes a reproducible 
reduction of alveolar bone height, without gingival inflammation or overt 
hyperparathyroidism but with evidence of failure of bone formation at the 
periodontal crest. We show that kidney disease alters the biochemical 
composition of saliva and induces progressive dysbiosis of the oral microbiota, 
with microbial samples from animals with kidney disease displaying reduced 
overall bacterial growth, increased alpha diversity, reduced abundance of key 
components of the healthy oral microbiota such as Streptococcus and Rothia, and 
an increase in minor taxa including those from gram-negative phyla 
Proteobacteria and Bacteroidetes. Co-housing diseased rats with healthy ones 
ameliorates the periodontal disease phenotype, whilst transfer of oral 
microbiota from mice with kidney disease causes periodontal disease in germ-free 
animals with normal kidney function.
CONCLUSIONS: We advocate that periodontal disease should be regarded as a 
complication of kidney disease, initiated by oral dysbiosis through mechanisms 
independent of overt inflammation or hyperparathyroidism.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfae266
PMID: 39568053

1. Gene. 2024 Nov 17;936:149106. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2024.149106. Online ahead of
 print.

Ferroptosis Induces gut microbiota and metabolic dysbiosis in Collagen-Induced 
arthritis mice via PAD4 enzyme.

Zhu X(1), Lu H(1), Li W(1), Niu S(1), Xue J(1), Sun H(2), Zhang J(3), Zhang 
Z(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Heilongjiang Provincial Hospital, Harbin 150001, 
China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, China. Electronic address: 
zhangjuan3732@hrbmu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin 150001, China. Electronic address: zhangzhiyi2014@163.com.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic autoimmune disease characterized by 
chronic inflammation and joint destruction, with emerging evidence implicating 
gut microbiota dysbiosis in its pathogenesis. The current study explores the 
role of ferroptosis, a form of regulated cell death driven by iron-dependent 
lipid peroxidation, in modulating gut microbiota and metabolic dysregulation 
through the enzyme peptidyl arginine deiminase 4 (PAD4) in collagen-induced 
arthritis (CIA) mouse model. Our findings demonstrate that ferroptosis 
exacerbates RA-related inflammatory responses and joint damage by upregulating 
PAD4 expression, which, in turn, influences the gut microbial composition and 
associated metabolite profiles. Erastin, a known ferroptosis agonist, 
significantly increased the relative abundance of pro-inflammatory bacteria such 
as Proteobacteria while reducing beneficial taxa like Firmicutes and 
Bacteroidetes. This microbial shift was associated with heightened oxidative 
stress and an imbalance in key metabolites, such as lysophosphatidyl 
ethanolamine 14:0 (LysoPE 14:0), further exacerbated by ferroptosis. 
Co-treatment with GSK484, a PAD4 inhibitor, reversed these effects, restoring 
microbial homeostasis and reducing joint inflammation. This study suggests that 
ferroptosis-mediated PAD4 activity contributes to RA pathogenesis by disrupting 
the gut-joint axis, providing novel insights into potential therapeutic targets 
for RA. Our results highlight the intricate interplay between immune-mediated 
cell death, gut microbiota, and systemic inflammation, emphasizing the 
importance of ferroptosis as a therapeutic target in mitigating RA progression.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2024.149106
PMID: 39561902

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2024 Nov 18;20(11):e1012577. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012577. eCollection 2024 Nov.

SPARTA: Interpretable functional classification of microbiomes and detection of 
hidden cumulative effects.

Ruiz B(1), Belcour A(1)(2), Blanquart S(1), Buffet-Bataillon S(3)(4), Le 
Huërou-Luron I(3), Siegel A(1), Le Cunff Y(1).

Author information:
(1)University Rennes, Inria, CNRS, IRISA, Rennes, France.
(2)University Grenoble Alpes, Inria, Grenoble, France.
(3)Institut NuMeCan, INRAE, INSERM, Univ Rennes, Saint-Gilles, France.
(4)Department of Clinical Microbiology, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.

The composition of the gut microbiota is a known factor in various diseases and 
has proven to be a strong basis for automatic classification of disease state. A 
need for a better understanding of microbiota data on the functional scale has 
since been voiced, as it would enhance these approaches' biological 
interpretability. In this paper, we have developed a computational pipeline for 
integrating the functional annotation of the gut microbiota into an automatic 
classification process and facilitating downstream interpretation of its 
results. The process takes as input taxonomic composition data, which can be 
built from 16S or whole genome sequencing, and links each component to its 
functional annotations through interrogation of the UniProt database. A 
functional profile of the gut microbiota is built from this basis. Both 
profiles, microbial and functional, are used to train Random Forest classifiers 
to discern unhealthy from control samples. SPARTA ensures full reproducibility 
and exploration of inherent variability by extending state-of-the-art methods in 
three dimensions: increased number of trained random forests, selection of 
important variables with an iterative process, repetition of full selection 
process from different seeds. This process shows that the translation of the 
microbiota into functional profiles gives non-significantly different 
performances when compared to microbial profiles on 5 of 6 datasets. This 
approach's main contribution however stems from its interpretability rather than 
its performance: through repetition, it also outputs a robust subset of 
discriminant variables. These selections were shown to be more consistent than 
those obtained by a state-of-the-art method, and their contents were validated 
through a manual bibliographic research. The interconnections between selected 
taxa and functional annotations were also analyzed and revealed that important 
annotations emerge from the cumulated influence of non-selected taxa.

Copyright: © 2024 Ruiz et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012577
PMID: 39556595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.

1. Curr Res Microb Sci. 2024 Oct 21;7:100300. doi: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2024.100300. 
eCollection 2024.

Characterization of the oral mycobiome of Portuguese with allergic rhinitis and 
asthma.

Pérez-Losada M(1)(2), Castro-Nallar E(3)(4), García-Huidobro J(5), Boechat 
JL(6)(7), Delgado L(6)(7)(8), Rama TA(6)(8), Oliveira M(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Computational Biology Institute, Department of Biostatistics & 
Bioinformatics, Milken Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington 
University, Washington, DC, 20052, USA.
(2)CIBIO-InBIO, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos, 
Universidade do Porto, Campus Agrário de Vairão, Vairão, 4485-661, Portugal.
(3)Departamento de Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad 
de Talca, Campus Talca, Avda. Lircay s/n, Talca, Chile.
(4)Centro de Ecología Integrativa, Universidad de Talca, Campus Talca, Avda. 
Lircay s/n, Talca, Chile.
(5)Centro de Nanomedicina, Diagnóstico y Desarrollo de Fármacos (ND3), Facultad 
de Medicina, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile.
(6)Serviço de Imunologia Básica e Clínica, Departamento de Patologia, Faculdade 
de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, 4200-319, Portugal.
(7)Centro de Investigação em Tecnologias e Serviços de Saúde (CINTESIS@RISE), 
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, 4200-319, Portugal.
(8)Serviço de Imunoalergologia, Unidade Local de Saúde São João (ULS São João), 
Porto, 4200-319, Portugal.
(9)Associate Laboratory i4HB-Institute for Health and Bioeconomy, University 
Institute of Health Sciences, CESPU, Avenida Central de Gandra 1317, 4585-116 
Gandra, Portugal.
(10)UCIBIO, Research Unit on Applied Molecular Biosciences, Forensic Sciences 
Research Laboratory, University Institute of Health Sciences (1H-TOXRUN, 
IUCS-CESPU), Avenida Central de Gandra 1317, 4585-116 Gandra, Portugal.

Allergic rhinitis and asthma are two prevailing chronic airway diseases and 
serious public health concerns. Previous research has already described the role 
of the airway bacteriome in these two diseases, but almost no study so far has 
explored the mycobiome and its possible association to airway inflammation. Here 
we sequenced the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) 1 and 2 to characterize the 
oral mycobiome of 349 Portuguese children and young adults with allergic 
rhinitis alone (AR) or with asthma (ARAS), asthmatics (AS) and healthy controls 
(HC). Our genomic analyses showed that the two most abundant fungal phyla 
(Ascomycota and Basidiomycota) and 3-5 of the 14 most abundant fungal genera 
(Cladosporium, Aspergillus, Aleurina, Candida and Rhodotorula) in the mouth 
differed significantly (P ≤ 0.04) between both rhinitic groups and HC. However, 
none of the same taxa varied significantly between the three respiratory disease 
groups (AR, ARAS and AS). The oral mycobiomes of respiratory ill patients showed 
the highest intra-group diversity (microbial richness and evenness), while HC 
showed the lowest, with all alpha-diversity indices varying significantly (P ≤ 
0.0424) between them. Similarly, all disease groups showed significant 
differences (P ≤ 0.0052) in microbial structure (i.e., beta-diversity indices) 
when compared to HC samples. Thirty metabolic pathways (PICRUSt2) were 
differentially abundant (Wald's test) between AR or ARAS and HC patients, but 
only one of them (D-galactose degradation I) was over abundant (log2 Fold Change 
>0.75) in the ARAS group. Spiec-Easi fungal networks varied greatly among 
groups, which suggests chronic respiratory allergic diseases may alter fungal 
connectivity in the mouth. This study increases our comprehension of the role of 
the oral mycobiome in allergy-related conditions. It shows for the first time 
that the oral mycobiota changes during health and allergic rhinitis (with and 
without asthma comorbidity) and highlights specific taxa, metabolic pathways and 
fungal interactions that may relate to chronic airway disease.

© 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crmicr.2024.100300
PMCID: PMC11567938
PMID: 39553201

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare the following financial 
interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing 
interests: Marcos Pérez Losada reports financial support was provided by 
Foundation for Science and Technology. If there are other authors, they declare 
that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2429754. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2429754. 
Epub 2024 Nov 17.

Dysrupted microbial tryptophan metabolism associates with SARS-CoV-2 acute 
inflammatory responses and long COVID.

Yao L(1)(2), Devotta H(1)(2), Li J(1)(2), Lunjani N(2)(3), Sadlier C(4)(5), 
Lavelle A(2)(6), Albrich WC(7), Walter J(1)(2), O'Toole PW(1)(2), O'Mahony 
L(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(2)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Limerick, Limerick, Ireland.
(4)Department of Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland.
(6)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, University College Cork, Cork, 
Ireland.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases & Hospital Epidemiology, Cantonal Hospital 
St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.

Protection against severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
infection and risk of long COVID has been associated with the depletion or 
over-abundance of specific taxa within the gut microbiome. However, the 
microbial mechanisms mediating these effects are not yet known. We hypothesized 
that altered microbial production of tryptophan and its downstream derivatives 
might contribute to inappropriate immune responses to viral infection. In 
patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (n = 172), serum levels of tryptophan and 
indole-3-propionate (IPA) negatively correlated with serum levels of many 
proinflammatory mediators (including C-reactive protein and Serum amyloid A), 
while C-glycosyltryptophan (C-Trp), indole-3-lactic acid (ILA) and 
indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) levels were positively correlated with levels of 
acute phase proteins, proinflammatory cytokines, alarmins and chemokines. A 
similar pattern was observed in long COVID patients (n = 20) where tryptophan 
and IPA were negatively associated with a large number of serum cytokines, while 
C-Trp and IAA were positively associated with circulating cytokine levels. 
Metagenomic analysis of the fecal microbiota showed the relative abundance of 
genes encoding the microbial enzymes required for tryptophan production (e.g. 
anthranilate synthase) and microbial tryptophan metabolism was significantly 
lower in patients hospitalized with COVID-19 (n = 380) compared to healthy 
controls (n = 270). Microbial tryptophan metabolites reduced innate cell 
proinflammatory responses to cytosolic DNA sensor Stimulator of interferon genes 
(STING), toll-like receptor (TLR)-3 and TLR-4 stimulation in vitro, while 
IL-10 secretion was enhanced. Microbial tryptophan metabolites also modified ex 
vivo human lymphocyte responses by limiting the production of TH1 and TH17 
associated cytokines, while enhancing secretion of IL-22. These data suggest 
that lower levels of tryptophan production and tryptophan metabolism by gut 
microbes may increase the risk of severe and chronic outcomes to SARS-CoV-2 
infection due to impaired innate and adaptive responses to infection. Screening 
patients for lower-level microbiome capacity for tryptophan metabolism may help 
identify at-risk individuals.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2429754
PMCID: PMC11581176
PMID: 39551951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: LOM is a consultant to PrecisionBiotics and has 
received research funding from GSK, Chiesi, Reckitt and Fonterra. LOM has 
participated in speaker’s bureau for Nestle, Nutricia, Yakult, Reckitt and 
Abbott. PWOT has received funding from Fonterra New Zealand and has participated 
in a speaker’s bureau for Yakult-Springer/Nature. None of the other authors 
report any potential conflict of interest.

1. Life Sci. 2024 Nov 15;359:123244. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2024.123244. Online ahead
 of print.

Contributions of the gut microbiota to Gulf War Illness susceptibility: Findings 
from a mouse model.

Chaudhari DS(1), Francescutti DM(1), Winters AD(1), Koka O(1), Kracht DJ(2), 
Greenberg JM(1), Theis KR(3), Angoa-Perez M(4).

Author information:
(1)Research and Development Service, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, 
MI, USA; Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, MI, USA.
(2)Research and Development Service, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, 
MI, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Wayne State 
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI, USA.
(4)Research and Development Service, John D. Dingell VA Medical Center, Detroit, 
MI, USA; Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 
Detroit, MI, USA. Electronic address: maperez@med.wayne.edu.

AIMS: In light of the evidence supporting a significant role of the gut 
microbiome in Gulf War Illness (GWI) pathology, we sought to examine its 
contribution to GWI susceptibility in a mouse model. We also aimed to identify 
bacterial taxa and microbially-derived metabolites associated with disease 
susceptibility.
MAIN METHODS: Male mice receiving pyridostigmine bromide (PB) orally, and 
controls were evaluated for symptoms of GWI at 8 weeks post-treatment. The 
Kansas criteria were adapted to assess behaviors associated with the following 
domains: gastrointestinal alterations, pain, mood, cognitive function, skin and 
respiratory disturbances. PB-treated subjects were classified into susceptible 
(GWI-S) or resilient (GWI-R). The status of the gut microbiome was assessed via 
analyses of the 16S rRNA gene and microbial-derived metabolites were evaluated 
with metabolomics tools.
KEY FINDINGS: Our results indicate that application of the Kansas criteria to 
behavioral outcomes in PB-treated mice resulted in a GWI susceptibility rate of 
~35 %, similar to the one reported in humans. The composition and structure of 
the gut microbiome was different in GWI-S subjects compared to both control and 
GWI-R mice at 8 weeks but differences in microbial community structure were 
observed prior to PB treatment between GWI-R and GWI-S mice. GWI-S subjects 
exhibited a pattern of differentially abundant bacterial taxa and microbial 
metabolites.
SIGNIFICANCE: To our knowledge, this is the first preclinical report in which a 
stratification by susceptibility to GWI and its association with the gut 
microbiome is described. In light of the research conundrum that vulnerability 
to GWI represents, the use of tools that could provide further insight into this 
complex factor should be considered.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2024.123244
PMID: 39551360

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Mariana Angoa-Perez reports 
financial support was provided by US Department of Defense. Mariana Angoa-Perez 
reports financial support was provided by US Department of Veterans Affairs. If 
there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2024 Nov 15:S0002-9165(24)00882-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.011. Online ahead of print.

Associations between dietary fibers and gut microbiome composition in the EDIA 
longitudinal infant cohort.

Lalli MK(1), Salo TEI(2), Hakola L(3), Knip M(4), Virtanen SM(5), Vatanen T(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(2)Department of Public Health, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland; Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere 
University, Tampere, Finland.
(3)Department of Public Health, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland; Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere 
University, Tampere, Finland; Tampere University Hospital, Wellbeing Services 
County of Pirkanmaa, Tampere, Finland.
(4)Research Program for Clinical and Molecular Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; New Children's Hospital, Helsinki 
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland; Tampere Center for Child Health 
Research, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(5)Department of Public Health, Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare, 
Helsinki, Finland; Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere 
University, Tampere, Finland; Tampere University Hospital, Wellbeing Services 
County of Pirkanmaa, Tampere, Finland; Tampere Center for Child Health Research, 
Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(6)Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 
02142, USA; Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. 
Electronic address: tommi.vatanen@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUND: The infant gut microbiome undergoes rapid changes in the first year 
of life, supporting normal development and long-term health. While diet shapes 
this process, the role of fibers in complementary foods on gut microbiome 
maturation is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVES: We explored how the transition from human milk to fibers in 
complementary foods shapes the taxonomic and functional maturation of the gut 
microbiome within the first year of life.
METHODS: We assessed the longitudinal and cross-sectional development of infant 
gut microbiomes (N=68 infants) and metabolomes (N=33 infants) using linear mixed 
models to uncover their associations to dietary fibers and their food sources. 
Fiber intakes were assessed with 3-day food records (months 3,6,9,12) relying on 
CODEX-compliant fiber fraction values, and questionnaires tracked the overall 
complementary food introduction. Bacterial species were identified and 
quantified via MetaPhlAn2 from metagenomic data, and metabolomic profiles were 
obtained using four LC-MS methods.
RESULTS: We identified 176 complementary food fiber-bacterial species 
associations. First plant-based fibers associated to microbiota compositions 
similar to breastfeeding, and further associated with aromatic amino acid 
metabolites, including 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (Total dietary fiber - 
Complementary foods (g) - β=3.50, CI 2.48-4.52, p=6.53x10-5). Distinct fibers 
from different food categories showed unique associations with specific 
bacterial taxa. Key species such as Faecalibacterium prausnitznii, associated 
with oat fibers (g/MJ, β=2.18, CI 1.36-2.84, p=6.12x10-6), reflective of 
maturing microbial communities. Fiber intake during weaning associated with 
shifts in metabolite profiles, including immunomodulatory metabolites, with 
fiber effects observed in a source- and timing-dependent manner, implicated in 
gradual microbiome diversification.
CONCLUSIONS: Introducing complementary dietary fibers during the weaning period 
supports gut microbiome diversification and stabilization. Even minor dietary 
variations showed significant associations with microbial taxa and functions 
from the onset of weaning, highlighting the importance of infant dietary 
recommendations that support the gut microbiome maturation during early life.
CLINICAL TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT01735123. 
Date of registration: November 24, 2012. https://www.
CLINICALTRIALS: gov/ct2/show/NCT01735123.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.011
PMID: 39551356

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest ☒ The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Mikael Knip reports financial 
support was provided by National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases (NIDDK). Mikael Knip reports financial support was provided by National 
Institutes of Health (1DP3DK094338-01). Mikael Knip reports financial support 
was provided by the Academy of Finland Centre of Excellence in Molecular Systems 
Immunology and Physiology Research 2012-17 (250114). Mikael Knip reports 
financial support was provided by the Medical Research Funds, Tampere and 
Helsinki University Hospitals. Tommi Vatanen reports was provided by The startup 
funding from the Helsinki Institute of Life Science, University of Helsinki. 
Tommi Vatanen reports a relationship with Nestle Nutrition Institute (NNI) that 
includes: speaking and lecture fees. If there are other authors, they declare 
that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Am J Infect Control. 2024 Nov 15:S0196-6553(24)00846-0. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajic.2024.11.006. Online ahead of print.

No detrimental effect on the hand microbiome of health care staff by frequent 
alcohol-based antisepsis.

Kramer A(1), Dahl MB(2), Bengtsson MM(2), Boyce JM(3), Heckmann M(4), Meister 
M(2), Papke R(1), Pittet D(5), Reinhard A(2), Slevogt H(6), Wang H(2), Zwicker 
P(1), Urich T(2), Seifert U(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Hygiene and Environmental Medicine, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany; Section Antiseptic Stewardship of the German 
Society of Hospital Hygiene e. V., Berlin, Germany.
(2)Institute of Microbiology, Bacterial Physiology, University of Greifswald, 
Greifswald, Germany.
(3)J.M. Boyce Consulting, LLC, Hyde Park, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care, University Medicine 
Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany; DZKJ (German Centre for Child and Adolescent 
Health), partner site Greifswald/Rostock, Greifswald, Germany.
(5)Infection Control Programme and WHO Collaborating Centre on Infection 
Prevention and Control & Antimicrobial Resistance, University of Geneva, Faculty 
of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Hannover Medical 
School, German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Breath, Hannover, Germany; 
Respiratory Infection Dynamics Group, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 
Braunschweig, Germany.
(7)Section Antiseptic Stewardship of the German Society of Hospital Hygiene e. 
V., Berlin, Germany; Friedrich Loeffler-Institute of Medical 
Microbiology-Virology, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany. 
Electronic address: ulrike.seifert@med.uni-greifswald.de.

BACKGROUND: The importance of ethanol-based hand rubs (EBHR) to prevent health 
care-associated infections is undisputed. However, there is a lack of meaningful 
data regarding the influence of EBHRs on skin microbiome.
METHODS: Four nurses in a neonatal intensive care unit were included. After a 
leave of 14 days, samples were taken before the first hand rubbing action and at 
the end of shift, with continued sampling on days 1, 7 and 28. To analyze the 
hand microbiome, microbial cells were collected using the glove-juice technique. 
Pro- and eukaryotic community profiles were created using amplicon sequencing of 
16S and 18S rRNA gene markers.
RESULTS: On average, hand antisepsis was performed 108 times per 8-hour work 
shift. Microbial communities were dominated by typical taxa found on human skin. 
In addition, a clear nurse-specific (i.e. individual) microbiome signature could 
be observed. For Prokaryota, daily exposure led to the end-of-the-day 
microbiomes being more similar to each other across nurses. In contrast, 
longitudinal effect of 28 day-application revealed more similarity of the 
Eukaryotic community.
CONCLUSIONS: Frequent occupational use of EBHR did not adversely affect the 
composition of the human hand microbiome. Thus, daily hand antisepsis retains 
its significance as the most important procedure for infection control.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajic.2024.11.006
PMID: 39551096

1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2024 Nov 14:S1081-1206(24)01657-0. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2024.11.005. Online ahead of print.

Perturbations in the airway microbiome are associated with type 2 asthma 
phenotype and severity.

Zhang W(1), Li L(2), Zhang Y(3), Dai J(3), Qiu C(2), Chen R(4), Shi F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital (Shenzhen 
People's Hospital), School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Shenzhen Respiratory Diseases, Institute of Shenzhen 
Respiratory Diseases, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Southern University of Science and Technology; The Second Clinical Medical 
College, Jinan University), Shenzhen, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The First 
Affiliated Hospital, Southern University of Science and Technology; The Second 
Clinical Medical College, Jinan University), Shenzhen, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Shenzhen Respiratory Diseases, Institute of Shenzhen 
Respiratory Diseases, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The First Affiliated Hospital, 
Southern University of Science and Technology; The Second Clinical Medical 
College, Jinan University), Shenzhen, People's Republic of China. Electronic 
address: chenrc@vip.163.com.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital (Shenzhen 
People's Hospital), School of Medicine, Southern University of Science and 
Technology, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China; Department of Infectious 
Diseases, Shenzhen People's Hospital (The First Affiliated Hospital, Southern 
University of Science and Technology; The Second Clinical Medical College, Jinan 
University), Shenzhen, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 
shi.fei@szhospital.com.

BACKGROUND: Airway microbiome has been linked to asthma heterogeneity, yet 
little is known about the associations between airway microbiota and type 2 (T2) 
asthma phenotype and severity.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the relationship of nasopharyngeal (NP) and 
induced sputum (IS) microbiota to the phenotypic features of T2 asthma.
METHODS: NP and IS samples from subjects with T2 mild-to-moderate asthma (n=23) 
and severe asthma (n=21) and healthy controls (n=16) were analyzed. Bacterial 
microbiota and functional profiles were compared. The correlation between 
microbial communities and clinical as well as inflammatory features was examined 
in asthmatics of two statuses.
RESULTS: Differences in NP and IS microbiota were associated with T2 asthma 
phenotype. Alterations in NP microbiota were more reflective of T2 inflammation 
and severity, with additional stratification of a subgroup characterized by 
significant elevations in T2 inflammatory biomarkers and reductions in bacterial 
richness and diversity (P < .05). Burkholderia-Caballeronia-Paraburkholderia, 
Ralstonia and Rhodococcus were identified as hub taxa within NP microbial 
network in T2 severe asthma, which were prevalent in the entire airway and 
involved in bacterial functions including inflammatory and steroid responses (P 
< .05). The composition and diversity of IS microbiota were complex, with 
Veillonella as the most altered genus, showing an increase with increasing 
asthma severity.
CONCLUSION: Our work revealed the significant associations of microbiota 
perturbations throughout the entire respiratory tract to the extent of T2 
inflammation, phenotype and severity in T2 asthma. The specific taxa identified 
invite further mechanistic investigations to unravel their possibility as 
biomarkers and therapeutic targets for T2 severe asthma.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2024.11.005
PMID: 39549985

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest none.

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Nov 16;22(1):1032. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05823-2.

Mendelian randomization analyses support causal relationships between gut 
microbiome and longevity.

Chen S(1), Chen W(2), Wang X(2), Liu S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Seven Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Shenzhen, 518107, Guangdong, China.
(2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Inflammatory Diseases, School 
of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, 518107, 
Guangdong, China.
(3)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Systems Medicine for Inflammatory Diseases, School 
of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University, Shenzhen, 518107, 
Guangdong, China. liusheng5@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Gut microbiome plays a significant role in longevity, and dysbiosis 
is indeed one of the hallmarks of aging. However, the causal relationship 
between gut microbiota and human longevity or aging remains elusive.
METHODS: Our study assessed the causal relationships between gut microbiome and 
longevity using Mendelian Randomization (MR). Summary statistics for the gut 
microbiome were obtained from four genome-wide association study (GWAS) 
meta-analysis of the MiBioGen consortium (N = 18,340), Dutch Microbiome Project 
(N = 7738), German individuals (N = 8956), and Finland individuals (N = 5959). 
Summary statistics for Longevity were obtained from Five GWAS meta-analysis, 
including Human healthspan (N = 300,447), Longevity (N = 36,745), Lifespans 
(N = 1,012,240), Parental longevity (N = 389,166), and Frailty (one of the 
primary aging-linked physiological hallmarks, N = 175,226).
RESULTS: Our findings reveal several noteworthy associations, including a 
negative correlation between Bacteroides massiliensis and longevity, whereas the 
genus Subdoligranulum and Alistipes, as well as species Alistipes senegalensis 
and Alistipes shahii, exhibited positive associations with specific longevity 
traits. Moreover, the microbial pathway of coenzyme A biosynthesis I, pyruvate 
fermentation to acetate and lactate II, and pentose phosphate pathway exhibited 
positive associations with two or more traits linked to longevity. Conversely, 
the TCA cycle VIII (helicobacter) pathway consistently demonstrated a negative 
correlation with lifespan and parental longevity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings of this MR study indicated many significant 
associations between gut microbiome and longevity. These microbial taxa and 
pathways may potentially play a protective role in promoting longevity or have a 
suppressive effect on lifespan.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-05823-2
PMCID: PMC11568586
PMID: 39548551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and concern to 
participate Not applicable. Consent for publication Not applicable. Competing 
interests No conflicts of interest to declare.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Nov 15;24(1):476. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03626-5.

Correlation between intestinal microbiota and urolithin metabolism in a human 
walnut dietary intervention.

Liu H(1), Birk JW(2), Provatas AA(3), Vaziri H(2), Fan N(4), Rosenberg DW(5), 
Gharaibeh RZ(6)(7), Jobin C(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA.
(3)Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT, USA.
(4)School of Medicine, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA.
(5)School of Medicine, University of Connecticut, Farmington, CT, USA. 
rosenberg@uchc.edu.
(6)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Raad.Gharaibeh@medicine.ufl.edu.
(7)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Raad.Gharaibeh@medicine.ufl.edu.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL, USA. Christian.Jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.
(9)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA. Christian.Jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.
(10)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL, USA. Christian.Jobin@medicine.ufl.edu.

This study is to investigate the relationship between the intestinal microbiota 
and urine levels of the ellagic acid-derived polyphenols, the urolithins, in a 
cohort of subjects following a three-week walnut dietary intervention. We 
longitudinally collected fecal and urine samples from 39 subjects before and 
after walnut consumption (2 oz per day for 21 days). 16S RNA gene sequencing was 
performed on fecal DNA to study the association between microbiota composition 
and the levels of nine urolithin metabolites, which were measured using 
UHPLC/Q-TOF-MS/MS. Fecal microbial composition was found to be significantly 
different between pre- and post-walnut intervention (beta diversity, 
FDR-p = 0.018; alpha diversity, p = 0.018). Roseburia, Rothia, Parasutterella, 
Lachnospiraceae UCG-004, Butyricicoccus, Bilophila, Eubacterium eligens, 
Lachnospiraceae UCG-001, Gordonibacter, Paraprevotella, Lachnospira, 
Ruminococcus torques, and Sutterella were identified as the 13 most 
significantly enriched genera after daily intake of walnuts. We observed 26 
genera that were significantly associated with 7 urolithin metabolites, with 22 
genera positively correlating after walnut supplementation (FDR-p ≤ 0.05). 
PICRUSt analysis showed that several inferred KEGG orthologs were associated 
with 4 urolithin metabolites after walnut intake. In this study, we found that 
walnut supplementation altered urolithin metabolites, which associates with 
specific changes in bacterial taxa and inferred functional contents.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03626-5
PMCID: PMC11566485
PMID: 39548408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to 
participate This study was approved by the University of Connecticut Health 
Institutional Review Board (IRB # 19-121JS-1) at the University of Connecticut 
Health. All participants provided written informed consent prior to enrollment 
in the study. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2024 Jan-Dec;53:19160216241293070. doi: 
10.1177/19160216241293070.

Alterations of Gut Microbiome Composition and Function Pre- and 
Post-Adenotonsillectomy in Children with Obstructive Sleep Apnea.

Chuang HH(1)(2)(3), Lee LA(2)(4)(5), Chuang LP(6), Li HY(4), Huang YS(7), Chou 
SH(8)(9), Lee GS(10)(11), Kuo TBJ(5)(12)(13), Yang CCH(5)(13), Huang CG(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Taipei Branch and Linkou Main Branch, Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)School of Medicine, College of Life Science and Medicine, National Tsing Hua 
University, Hsinchu, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Community Medicine, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Linkou Main Branch, 
Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Brain Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(6)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Linkou Main Branch, Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Child Psychiatry, Linkou Main Branch, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(8)Graduate Institute of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Science, Fu Jen Catholic 
University, New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(9)Biotools Co., Ltd., New Taipei City, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Otolaryngology, Ren-Ai Branch, Taipei City Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(11)School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(12)Center for Mind and Brain Medicine, Tsaotun Psychiatric Center, Ministry of 
Health and Welfare, Nantou, Taiwan.
(13)Sleep Research Center, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(14)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Linkou Main Branch, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(15)Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, Department of Medical 
Biotechnology and Laboratory Science, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

IMPORTANCE: Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) in children is linked with alterations 
in the gut microbiome. The influence of adenotonsillectomy (AT), a primary 
intervention for OSA, on gut microbiota dynamics relative to disease severity 
remains to be elucidated.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the impact of OSA severity and AT on 
the gut microbiome in pediatric patients.
DESIGN: A prospective observational study.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PARTICIPANTS: A cohort of 55 pediatric patients treated with AT for OSA.
INTERVENTION: Total tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy procedures.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Comprehensive evaluations included in-laboratory 
polysomnography and 16S rRNA gut microbiome profiling at baseline, and again at 
3rd and 12thmonth following surgery.
RESULTS: Initial findings showed uniform α-diversity across different severities 
of OSA, while β-diversity was significantly elevated in the severe OSA subgroup. 
Certain gut microbiota taxa (Lachnospiraceae NK4A136 group, Ruminococcaceae 
UCG-002, Ruminococcaceae UCG-014, Alloprevotella, Christensenellaceae R-7 group, 
Ruminococcaceae UCG-005, Lactobacillus murinus, and Prevotella nigrescens) were 
found to inversely correlate with the apnea-hypopnea index (AHI). Significant 
post-AT improvements in AHI and other polysomnographic metrics were observed. 
Notably, AHI changes post-AT were positively associated with microbial 
α-diversity (species richness), β-diversity, and specific bacterial taxa 
(Enterobacter, Parasutterella, Akkermansia, Roseburia, and Bacteroides plebeius 
DSM 17135), but negatively with other taxa (Fusicatenibacter, Bifidobacterium, 
UBA1819, Ruminococcus gnavus group, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. Longum, and 
Parabacteroides distasonis) and specific metabolic pathways (purine metabolism, 
transcription factors, and type II diabetes mellitus). The postoperative 
patterns of α- and β-diversity mirrored baseline values.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study documents significant changes in the gut 
microbiome of pediatric patients after AT, including variations in α- and 
β-diversities, bacterial communities, and inferred metabolic functions. These 
changes suggest a potential association between the surgical intervention and 
microbiome alterations, although further studies are necessary to discern the 
specific contributions of AT amidst possible confounding factors such as 
antibiotic use.

DOI: 10.1177/19160216241293070
PMCID: PMC11565609
PMID: 39544149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

1. Cell. 2024 Nov 4:S0092-8674(24)01204-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.022.
Online  ahead of print.

Fecal microbial load is a major determinant of gut microbiome variation and a 
confounder for disease associations.

Nishijima S(1), Stankevic E(2), Aasmets O(3), Schmidt TSB(1), Nagata N(4), 
Keller MI(1), Ferretti P(1), Juel HB(2), Fullam A(1), Robbani SM(1), Schudoma 
C(1), Hansen JK(5), Holm LA(6), Israelsen M(5), Schierwagen R(7), Torp N(5), 
Telzerow A(1), Hercog R(1), Kandels S(1), Hazenbrink DHM(1), Arumugam M(2), 
Bendtsen F(8), Brøns C(9), Fonvig CE(10), Holm JC(10), Nielsen T(11), Pedersen 
JS(8), Thiele MS(5), Trebicka J(12), Org E(3), Krag A(5), Hansen T(2), Kuhn 
M(13), Bork P(14); GALAXY and MicrobLiver Consortia.

Collaborators: Hansen T, Mann M, Matthijnssens J, Krag A, Bork P, Arumugam M, 
Trebicka J, Karsdal M, Anastasiadou E, Israelsen H, Melberg HO, Legido-Quigley 
C, Thiele M.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Systems Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
(2)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(4)Department of Gastroenterological Endoscopy, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark; 
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Odense University Hospital, 
Odense, Denmark.
(6)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; The Children's Obesity Clinic, Department of 
Pediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital Holbæk, Holbæk, Denmark.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine B, University of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(8)Gastrounit, Medical Division, Copenhagen University Hospital Hvidovre, 
Hvidovre, Denmark.
(9)Clinical Research, Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen, Herlev, Denmark.
(10)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; The Children's Obesity Clinic, Department of 
Pediatrics, Copenhagen University Hospital Holbæk, Holbæk, Denmark; Department 
of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of 
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; 
Medical department, University Hospital Zeeland, Køge, Denmark.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine B, University of Münster, Münster, Germany; 
European Foundation for the Study of Chronic Liver Failure, EFCLIF, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(13)Molecular Systems Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: mkuhn@embl.de.
(14)Molecular Systems Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, 
Heidelberg, Germany; Max Delbrück Centre for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, 
Germany; Department of Bioinformatics, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, 
Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address: peer.bork@embl.org.

The microbiota in individual habitats differ in both relative composition and 
absolute abundance. While sequencing approaches determine the relative 
abundances of taxa and genes, they do not provide information on their absolute 
abundances. Here, we developed a machine-learning approach to predict fecal 
microbial loads (microbial cells per gram) solely from relative abundance data. 
Applying our prediction model to a large-scale metagenomic dataset (n = 34,539), 
we demonstrated that microbial load is the major determinant of gut microbiome 
variation and is associated with numerous host factors, including age, diet, and 
medication. We further found that for several diseases, changes in microbial 
load, rather than the disease condition itself, more strongly explained 
alterations in patients' gut microbiome. Adjusting for this effect substantially 
reduced the statistical significance of the majority of disease-associated 
species. Our analysis reveals that the fecal microbial load is a major 
confounder in microbiome studies, highlighting its importance for understanding 
microbiome variation in health and disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.10.022
PMID: 39541968

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.

1. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2024 Nov 13;150(11):495. doi: 
10.1007/s00432-024-06028-2.

The role of gut microbial β-glucuronidases in carcinogenesis and cancer 
treatment: a scoping review.

Hillege LE(#)(1)(2), Stevens MAM(#)(3)(4), Kristen PAJ(3)(4), de Vos-Geelen 
J(3)(5), Penders J(6)(7), Redinbo MR(8), Smidt ML(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)GROW - School for Oncology and Reproduction, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands. l.hillege@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(2)Department of Surgery, FHML, Maastricht University Medical Center+, 
Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands. 
l.hillege@maastrichtuniversity.nl.
(3)GROW - School for Oncology and Reproduction, Maastricht University, 
Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Surgery, FHML, Maastricht University Medical Center+, 
Maastricht University, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(5)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Maastricht 
University Medical Center+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(6)NUTRIM - School of Nutrition and Translational Research in Metabolism, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medical Microbiology, Infectious Diseases and Infection 
Prevention, Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, the Netherlands.
(8)Departments of Chemistry, Biochemistry & Biophysics, and Microbiology & 
Immunology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: The human gut microbiota influence critical functions including 
the metabolism of nutrients, xenobiotics, and drugs. Gut microbial 
β-glucuronidases (GUS) enzymes facilitate the removal of glucuronic acid from 
various compounds, potentially affecting anti-cancer drug efficacy and 
reactivating carcinogens. This review aims to comprehensively analyze and 
summarize studies on the role of gut microbial GUS in cancer and its interaction 
with anti-cancer treatments. Its goal is to collate and present insights that 
are directly relevant to patient care and treatment strategies in oncology.
METHODS: This scoping review followed PRISMA-ScR guidelines and focused on 
primary research exploring the role of GUS within the gut microbiota related to 
cancer etiology and anti-cancer treatment. Comprehensive literature searches 
were conducted in PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science.
RESULTS: GUS activity was only investigated in colorectal cancer (CRC), 
revealing increased fecal GUS activity, variations in the gut microbial 
composition, and GUS-contributing bacterial taxa in CRC patients versus 
controls. Irinotecan affects gastrointestinal (GI) health by increasing GUS 
expression and shifting gut microbial composition, particularly by enhancing the 
presence of GUS-producing bacteria, correlating with irinotecan-induced GI 
toxicities. GUS inhibitors (GUSi) can mitigate irinotecan's adverse effects, 
protecting the intestinal barrier and reducing diarrhea.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first review to comprehensively 
analyze and summarize studies on the critical role of gut microbial GUS in 
cancer and anti-cancer treatment, particularly irinotecan. It underscores the 
potential of GUSi to reduce side effects and enhance treatment efficacy, 
highlighting the urgent need for further research to integrate GUS targeting 
into future anti-cancer treatment strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00432-024-06028-2
PMCID: PMC11561038
PMID: 39537966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of interest JVG has served 
as a consultant for Amgen, AstraZeneca, MSD, Pierre Fabre, and Servier, and has 
received institutional research funding from Servier, all outside the submitted 
work. MRR has received funding grants from Merck & Co. Inc. and Eli Lilly and 
Company, and is a board member of Symberix, Inc., all outside the submitted 
work. If there are other authors, they declare that they have no known competing 
financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to 
influence the work reported in this paper.

1. Am J Clin Nutr. 2024 Nov 12:S0002-9165(24)00878-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.007. Online ahead of print.

Associations of alcohol intake with gut microbiome: a prospective study in a 
predominantly low-income Black/African American population.

Liu L(1), Nguyen SM(1), Wang L(1), Shi J(1), Long J(1), Cai Q(1), Shrubsole 
MJ(1), Shu XO(1), Zheng W(1), Yu D(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology 
Center, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Epidemiology 
Center, School of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States. 
Electronic address: danxia.yu@vumc.org.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol intake can alter gut microbiome, which may subsequently 
affect human health. However, limited population-based, prospective studies have 
investigated associations of habitual and recent alcohol intake with the gut 
microbiome, particularly among Black/African American individuals.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the association of alcohol intake with gut microbiome in 
a predominantly low-income Black/African American population.
METHODS: We investigated the dose- and type-specific associations of habitual 
and recent alcohol intake with the gut microbiome among 538 Black/African 
American adults (150 males and 388 females). Habitual and recent alcohol intakes 
were assessed at cohort baseline (2002-2009) and stool collection (2018-2021), 
respectively. Gut microbiome was profiled using shotgun metagenomic sequencing. 
Generalized linear models were employed to evaluate the associations between 
alcohol intakes and gut microbiome composition, with adjustments for 
sociodemographic characteristics, other lifestyle factors, and comorbidities. 
False discovery rate (FDR) <0.1 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS: The mean age at enrollment was 53.2 ± 7.7 y, with a mean interval of 
13.8 y (range: 9.0-18.1 y) between baseline and stool sample collection. Recent 
alcohol intake was not significantly associated with microbial taxa abundance. 
However, habitual alcohol intake, both total amount and types of alcoholic 
beverages, showed significant associations with several microbial taxa 
abundance, primarily in males, including species within classes Clostridia, 
Bacilli, and Mahellia within Firmicutes. Specifically, total alcohol, beer, and 
red wine intakes were all inversely associated with genus MGYG-HGUT-02719 within 
class Clostridia (β = -2.26 to -0.09 per 1 drink/d increase). Red wine 
consumption was also inversely associated with the abundance of genera CAG-110, 
Oscillibacter, and Gemmiger within class Clostridia (β = -3.88 to -2.69), 
whereas positively associated with genus Absiella (β = 1.81) within class 
Bacilli. Most of these associations remained significant after additionally 
adjusting for BMI and baseline comorbidities.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified gut microbial taxa associated with habitual alcohol 
intake among Black/African American males, although the magnitudes of these 
associations were generally small. Further research is needed to determine if 
these bacteria modify alcohol-disease relationships.

Copyright © 2024 American Society for Nutrition. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajcnut.2024.11.007
PMID: 39537028

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.

1. Cureus. 2024 Oct 8;16(10):e71111. doi: 10.7759/cureus.71111. eCollection 2024 
Oct.

The Role of Gut Microbiota in the Efficacy and Side Effect Profile of Biologic 
Therapies for Autoimmune Diseases.

Qusty N(1), Sarhan A(2), Taha M(3), Alshanqiti A(4), Almuteb AM(5), Alfaraidi 
AT(6), Alkhairi HA(4), Alzahrani MM(7), Alamry AHA(8), Alomry TQB(4), Bannan 
OA(4), Almaashi MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, 
SAU.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, SAU.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Umm Al-Qura University, Al-Qunfudhah, SAU.
(4)College of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, Al-Qunfudhah, SAU.
(5)College of Medicine, Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Riyadh, SAU.
(6)College of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, SAU.
(7)College of Medicine, Taif University, Taif, SAU.
(8)College of Medicine, Petre Shotadze Tbilisi Medical Academy, Tbilisi, GEO.

The role of gut microbiota in influencing the efficacy and side effect profile 
of biological therapies for autoimmune diseases has gained increasing attention. 
Understanding these interactions is crucial for optimizing treatment outcomes 
and minimizing adverse events associated with biological therapies. This 
systematic review was conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for 
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. We comprehensively 
analyzed studies involving human subjects with autoimmune diseases treated with 
biological therapies. Data on gut microbiota composition, therapeutic efficacy, 
and side effect profiles were extracted and synthesized to assess the impact of 
microbiota on treatment outcomes. Our review identified a significant 
relationship between gut microbiota composition and the efficacy of biological 
therapies. Specific bacterial taxa, such as Clostridiales and Roseburia 
inulinivorans, were associated with improved therapeutic responses, while 
alterations in microbiota were linked to increased adverse events. The 
predictive potential was demonstrated with microbiota signatures correlating 
with treatment success and side effects, highlighting the relevance of microbial 
profiles in therapeutic outcomes. The findings suggest that gut microbiota plays 
a pivotal role in modulating the efficacy and side effect profile of biological 
therapies for autoimmune diseases. Integrating microbiota assessments into 
clinical practice could enhance personalized treatment strategies and improve 
patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2024, Qusty et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.71111
PMCID: PMC11548951
PMID: 39525264

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.

1. Microbes Infect. 2024 Nov 9:105434. doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105434. Online 
ahead of print.

Bad company? The pericardium microbiome in people investigated for tuberculous 
pericarditis in an HIV-prevalent setting.

Nyawo G(1), Naidoo CC(1), Wu BG(2), Kwok B(3), Clemente JC(4), Li Y(3), Minnies 
S(5), Reeve B(5), Moodley S(1), John TJ(6), Karamchand S(7), Singh S(3), 
Pecararo A(7), Doubell A(7), Kyriakakis C(8), Warren R(5), Segal LN(3), Theron 
G(9).

Author information:
(1)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of 
Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; African Microbiome Institute, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, 
South Africa.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA; Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care, Veterans Affairs New York Harbor Healthcare System, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, USA.
(5)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of 
Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stellenbosch University & 
Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa; Panorama Mediclinic, Cape 
Town, South Africa.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stellenbosch University & 
Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(8)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Stellenbosch University & 
Tygerberg Academic Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa; Life Vincent Pallotti 
Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa.
(9)DSI-NRF Centre of Excellence for Biomedical Tuberculosis Research, South 
African Medical Research Council Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Division of 
Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, South Africa; African Microbiome Institute, 
Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Stellenbosch University, Cape Town, 
South Africa. Electronic address: gtheron@sun.ac.za.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Apr 27:2024.04.26.24306431. doi: 10.1101/2024.04.26.24306431.

BACKGROUND: The site-of-disease microbiome and predicted metagenome were 
evaluated in a cross-sectional study involving people with presumptive 
tuberculous pericarditis. We also explored the interaction between C-reactive 
protein (CRP) and the microbiome.
METHODS: People with effusions requiring diagnostic pericardiocentesis (n=139) 
provided pericardial fluid for sequencing and blood for CRP measurement.
RESULTS: Pericardial fluid microbiota differed in β-diversity among people with 
definite (dTB, n=91), probable (pTB, n=25), and non- (nTB, n=23) tuberculous 
pericarditis. dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Lacticigenium-, and Kocuria-enriched vs. 
nTBs. HIV-positive dTBs were Mycobacterium-, Bifidobacterium-, 
Methylobacterium-, and Leptothrix-enriched vs. HIV-negative dTBs. HIV-positive 
dTBs on ART were Mycobacterium- and Bifidobacterium-depleted vs. those not on 
ART. dTBs exhibited enrichment in short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) and 
mycobacterial metabolism pathways vs. nTBs. Additional non-pericardial 
involvement (pulmonary infiltrates) was associated with Mycobacterium-enrichment 
and Streptococcus-depletion. Mycobacterium reads were in 34 % (31/91) of dTBs, 
8 % (2/25) of pTBs and 17 % (4/23) nTBs. People with CRP above (vs. below) the 
median value had different β-diversity (Pseudomonas-depleted). No correlation 
was found between enriched taxa in dTBs and CRP.
CONCLUSIONS: Pericardial fluid microbial composition varies by tuberculosis 
status, HIV (and ART) status and dTBs are enriched in SCFA-associated taxa. The 
clinical significance, including mycobacterial reads in nTBs and pTBs, requires 
evaluation.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micinf.2024.105434
PMID: 39528106

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Nov 11:gkae1004. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae1004. Online
ahead  of print.

The mOTUs online database provides web-accessible genomic context to taxonomic 
profiling of microbial communities.

Dmitrijeva M(1), Ruscheweyh HJ(1), Feer L(1), Li K(1), Miravet-Verde S(1), 
Sintsova A(1), Mende DR(2), Zeller G(3)(4)(5), Sunagawa S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Microbiology and Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.
(2)Medical Microbiology and Infection Prevention (MMI), Amsterdam University 
Medical Center, 1105AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Structural and Computational Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.
(4)Leiden University Center for Infectious Diseases (LUCID), Leiden University 
Medical Center, 2333ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Center for Microbiome Analyses and Therapeutics, Leiden University Medical 
Center, 2333ZA Leiden, Netherlands.

Determining the taxonomic composition (taxonomic profiling) is a fundamental 
task in studying environmental and host-associated microbial communities. 
However, genome-resolved microbial diversity on Earth remains undersampled, and 
accessing the genomic context of taxa detected during taxonomic profiling 
remains a challenging task. Here, we present the mOTUs online database 
(mOTUs-db), which is consistent with and interfaces with the mOTUs taxonomic 
profiling tool. It comprises 2.83 million metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) 
and 919 090 single-cell and isolate genomes from 124 295 species-level taxonomic 
units. In addition to being one of the largest prokaryotic genome resources to 
date, all MAGs in the mOTUs-db were reconstructed de novo in 117 902 individual 
samples by abundance correlation of scaffolds across multiple samples for 
improved quality metrics. The database complements the Genome Taxonomy Database, 
with over 50% of its species-level taxonomic groups being unique. It also offers 
interactive querying, enabling users to explore and download genomes at various 
taxonomic levels. The mOTUs-db is accessible at https://motus-db.org.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkae1004
PMID: 39526369

1. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2024 Nov 9. doi: 10.1007/s10096-024-04980-y. 
Online ahead of print.

Clinical relevance of lung microbiota composition in critically ill children 
with acute lower respiratory tract infections: insights from a retrospective 
analysis of metagenomic sequencing.

Men Z(1), Chen Z(1), Gu X(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang X(1), Fang F(2), Shen M(3), Huang 
S(1), Wu S(1), Zhou L(4), Bai Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 
92, Zhongnan Street, Suzhou Industrial park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215025, China.
(2)Institute of Pediatric Research, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, 
Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Medical Department, Nanjing Dinfectome Technology Inc., Nanjing, Jiangsu, 
China.
(4)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 
92, Zhongnan Street, Suzhou Industrial park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215025, China. 
libing_zhou@outlook.com.
(5)Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, No. 
92, Zhongnan Street, Suzhou Industrial park, Suzhou, Jiangsu, 215025, China. 
18913510429@163.com.

PURPOSE: Acute lower respiratory tract infections (ALRIs) is a leading cause of 
child mortality worldwide. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) 
identifies ALRIs pathogens and explores the lung microbiota's role in disease 
severity and clinical outcomes. This study examines the association between lung 
microbiota and ALRIs outcomes in children, exploring its potential as a 
prognostic biomarker.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed mNGS data from the bronchoalveolar lavage 
fluid (BALF) of 83 pediatric ALRIs patients from 2019 to 2023. Microbial 
diversity and relative abundances of specific taxa were compared between 
survivor and non-survivor groups, as well as between varying severity levels. 
LEfSe was employed to identify key biomarkers related to survival and disease 
severity.
RESULTS: Among the 83 patients, 68 survived and 15 died. Patients were also 
divided into a low severity group (n = 38) and a moderate-to-very-high severity 
group (n = 45) according to mPIRO score at admission. Significant differences in 
beta diversity were observed between the survival groups and across different 
severity levels. Prevotella, Haemophilus and Veillonella exhibited higher 
abundances in both the survivor and low severity groups, suggesting their 
potential as predictors of better outcomes. Conversely, Enterococcus and 
Acinetobacter baumannii were more prevalent in the non-survivor and 
moderate-to-very-high severity groups. Additionally, Streptococcus pneumoniae 
and Streptococcus mitis showed increased abundances in survivors. LEfSe further 
revealed that these microorganisms may predict outcomes and severity in ALRIs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings underscore the complex relationship between lung 
microbiota and ALRIs, with specific microbial profiles associated with disease 
severity and clinical outcomes. This underscores the need for further research 
to explore and validate its prognostic predictive capacity.
CLINICAL TRIAL NUMBER: Not applicable.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10096-024-04980-y
PMID: 39520618

1. Nutrients. 2024 Oct 25;16(21):3619. doi: 10.3390/nu16213619.

Healthy Dietary Pattern Cycling Affects Gut Microbiota and Cardiovascular 
Disease Risk Factors: Results from a Randomized Controlled Feeding Trial with 
Young, Healthy Adults.

Wang Y(1), Cross TL(1), Lindemann SR(2), Tang M(3), Campbell WW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, 
USA.
(2)Department of Food Science, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.
(3)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

BACKGROUND: Previous research demonstrates that adopting, abandoning, and 
re-adopting (i.e., cycling) a healthy dietary pattern (HDP) improved, reverted, 
and re-improved cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factors. In addition, changes 
in CVD risk factors are associated with dietary modifications of gut microbiota.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to assess the effects of cycling an HDP on gut microbiota 
and CVD risk factors.
METHODS: Retrospectively, we used data from a randomized controlled, crossover 
trial with three 3-week controlled dietary interventions, each separated by a 
5-week period of participant-chosen, uncontrolled food intake. Seventeen 
participants (10 males, 7 females, age 26 ± 4 years old, BMI 23 ± 3 kg/m2) all 
consumed intervention diets that followed healthy U.S.-style dietary patterns. 
Gut microbiota composition and cardiovascular risk factors were measured before 
and after each HDP.
RESULTS: Repeatedly adopting and abandoning an HDP led to a cycling pattern of 
changes in the gut microbial community and taxonomic composition. During the HDP 
cycles, relative abundances of several bacterial taxa (e.g., Collinsella, 
Mediterraneibacter, Romboutsia, and Dorea) decreased and returned to baseline 
repeatedly. Similar HDP cycling occurred for multiple CVD risk factors (i.e., 
serum total cholesterol and LDL-C concentrations). Consistent negative 
associations were observed between changes in Mediterraneibacter or Collinsella 
and serum total cholesterol/HDL-C ratio.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support previous findings that HDP cycling affected 
multiple CVD risk factors and expand the HDP cycling phenomenon to include 
several bacterial taxa. Young adults are encouraged to adopt and sustain a 
healthy dietary pattern to improve cardiovascular health, potentially through 
modifying gut microbiota composition.

DOI: 10.3390/nu16213619
PMCID: PMC11547453
PMID: 39519452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: During the time this research was conducted, 
W.W.C. received funding for research grants, travel or honoraria for scientific 
presentations, or consulting services from the following organizations: U.S. 
National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Agriculture (Hatch Funding), 
Pork Checkoff, National Pork Board, Beef Checkoff, North Dakota Beef Commission, 
National Cattlemen’s Beef Association, Foundation for Meat and Poultry Research 
and Education, American Egg Board, Whey Protein Research Consortium, National 
Dairy Council, Barilla Group, Mushroom Council, and the National Chicken 
Council. During the time this research was conducted, S.R.L. received funding 
for research grants, travel or honoraria for scientific presentations, or 
consulting services from the following organizations: U.S. National Institutes 
of Health, U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. National Science Foundation, 
C.P. Kelco, Inc., OLIPOP, Inc., Council for Responsible Nutrition, and the Grain 
Foods Foundation. Y.W., T.-W.L.C. and M.T. declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders and these other organizations had no role in the design of the study; in 
the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the 
manuscript; or in the decision to publish the results.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 26;25(21):11510. doi: 10.3390/ijms252111510.

Changes in Gut Microbial Composition and DNA Methylation in Obese Patients with 
NAFLD After Bariatric Surgery.

Agodi A(1), Ojeda-Granados C(1), Maugeri A(1), Barchitta M(1), Coco O(1)(2), 
Pezzino S(1), Magro G(1), Greca G(1), Latteri FS(1), Castorina S(1)(2), Puleo 
S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "GF 
Ingrassia", University of Catania, 95123 Catania, Italy.
(2)Mediterranean Foundation "GB Morgagni", 95125 Catania, Italy.

This study investigates the effects of bariatric surgery on non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease (NAFLD) by examining the interplay between gut microbiota, 
epigenetics, and metabolic health. A cohort of 22 patients undergoing sleeve 
gastrectomy (SG) was analyzed for changes in gut microbial composition and DNA 
methylation profiles before and six months after surgery. Correlations between 
gut microbial abundance and clinical markers at baseline revealed that certain 
genera were associated with worse metabolic health and liver markers. Following 
SG, significant improvements were observed in the clinical, anthropometric, and 
biochemical parameters of the NAFLD patients. Although alpha-diversity indices 
(i.e., Chao1, Simpson, Shannon) did not show significant changes, beta-diversity 
analysis revealed a slight shift in microbial composition (PERMANOVA, p = 
0.036). Differential abundance analysis identified significant changes in 
specific bacterial taxa, including an increase in beneficial Lactobacillus 
species such as Lactobacillus crispatus and Lactobacillus iners and a decrease 
in harmful taxa like Erysipelotrichia. Additionally, DNA methylation analysis 
revealed 609 significant differentially methylated CpG sites between the 
baseline values and six months post-surgery, with notable enrichment in genes 
related to the autophagy pathway, such as IRS4 and ATG4B. The results highlight 
the individualized responses to bariatric surgery and underscore the potential 
for personalized treatment strategies. In conclusion, integrating gut microbiota 
and epigenetic factors into NAFLD management could enhance treatment outcomes, 
suggesting that future research should explore microbiome-targeted therapies and 
long-term follow-ups on liver health post-surgery.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252111510
PMCID: PMC11547129
PMID: 39519065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2024 Nov 7;191:275-286. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020.
Online  ahead of print.

Associations of the gut microbiome with outcomes in cervical and endometrial 
cancer patients treated with pembrolizumab: Insights from the phase II PRIMMO 
trial.

De Jaeghere EA(1), Hamerlinck H(2), Tuyaerts S(3), Lippens L(4), Van Nuffel 
AMT(5), Baiden-Amissah R(6), Vuylsteke P(7), Henry S(8), Trinh XB(9), van Dam 
PA(10), Aspeslagh S(11), De Caluwé A(12), Naert E(13), Lambrechts D(14), Hendrix 
A(15), De Wever O(16), Van de Vijver KK(17), Amant F(18), Vandecasteele K(19), 
Verhasselt B(20), Denys HG(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: emiel.dejaeghere@ugent.be.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: hannelore.hamerlinck@uzgent.be.
(3)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Medical Oncology, 
University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, Belgium; Laboratory for Medical and 
Molecular Oncology (LMMO), VUB, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
sandra.tuyaerts@uzbrussel.be.
(4)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: lien.lippens@ugent.be.
(5)Anticancer Fund (ACF), Strombeek-Bever, Belgium.
(6)Gynaecologic Oncology, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Leuven Cancer Institute, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
reginaesimensimah.baidenamissah@kuleuven.be.
(7)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: peter.vuylsteke@uclouvain.be.
(8)Department of Hemato-Oncology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Université 
Catholique de Louvain Namur (Sainte-Elisabeth), Namur, Belgium. Electronic 
address: stephanie.henry@uclouvain.be.
(9)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital Antwerp, 
Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), University 
Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research (CORE), 
Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, Belgium. 
Electronic address: xuanbich.trinh@uza.be.
(10)Department of Gynecologic Oncology and Senology, University Hospital 
Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Multidisciplinary Oncologic Centre Antwerp (MOCA), 
University Hospital Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium; Center for Oncological Research 
(CORE), Integrated Personalized and Precision Oncology Network (IPPON), Edegem, 
Belgium. Electronic address: peter.vandam@uza.be.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, University Hospital Brussels, Brussels, 
Belgium. Electronic address: sandrine.aspeslagh@uzbrussel.be.
(12)Department of Radiation Oncology, Jules Bordet Institute, Brussels, Belgium; 
Department of Radiation Oncology, General Hospital Sint-Maarten, Mechelen, 
Belgium. Electronic address: alex.decaluwe@bordet.be.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
eline.naert@ugent.be.
(14)VIB-KU Leuven Center for Cancer Biology, Belgium. Electronic address: 
diether.lambrechts@kuleuven.be.
(15)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: an.hendrix@ugent.be.
(16)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Laboratory of 
Experimental Cancer Research, Department of Human Structure and Repair, Ghent 
University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: olivier.dewever@ugent.be.
(17)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; Center for Gynecologic 
Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer Institute and Amsterdam Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
koen.vandevijver@uzgent.be.
(18)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Center for Gynecologic Oncology Amsterdam (CGOA), Netherlands Cancer 
Institute and Amsterdam Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department 
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 
Electronic address: f.amant@nki.nl.
(19)Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium; Department of 
Radiation Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic 
address: katrien.vandecasteele@uzgent.be.
(20)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 
Belgium; Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. 
Electronic address: bruno.verhasselt@uzgent.be.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; 
Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
hannelore.denys@ugent.be.

BACKGROUND: The phase II PRIMMO trial investigated a pembrolizumab-based regimen 
in patients with recurrent and/or metastatic cervical (CC) or endometrial (EC) 
carcinoma who had at least one prior line of systemic therapy. Here, exploratory 
studies of the gut microbiome (GM) are presented.
METHODS: The microbial composition of 77 longitudinal fecal samples obtained 
from 35 patients (CC, n = 15; EC, n = 20) was characterized using 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing. Analyses included assessment of alpha (Shannon index) and beta 
diversity (weighted UniFrac), unbiased hierarchical clustering, and linear 
discriminant analysis effect size. Correlative studies with demographics, 
disease characteristics, safety, efficacy, and immune monitoring data were 
performed.
RESULTS: Significant enrichment in multiple bacterial taxa was associated with 
the occurrence or resistance to severe treatment-related adverse events (overall 
or gastrointestinal toxicity specifically). Consistent differences in GM 
taxonomic composition before pembrolizumab initiation were observed between 
patients with favorable efficacy (e.g., enriched with Blautia genus) and those 
with poor efficacy (e.g., enriched with Enterobacteriaceae family and its 
higher-level taxa up to the phylum level, as well as Clostridium genus and its 
Clostridiaceae family). Two naturally occurring GM clusters with distinct 
bacterial compositions were identified. These clusters showed a more than 
four-fold differential risk for death (hazard ratio, 4.4 [95 % confidence 
interval, 1.9 to 10.3], P < 0.001) and were associated with interesting (but 
non-significant) trends in peripheral immune monitoring data.
CONCLUSION: Although exploratory, this study offers initial insights into the 
intricate interplay between the GM and clinical outcomes in patients with CC and 
EC treated with a pembrolizumab-based regimen.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov (identifier NCT03192059) and EudraCT 
Registry (number 2016-001569-97).

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2024.10.020
PMID: 39515198

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest EAD: travel 
and accommodation expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, GSK, 
and Pfizer. AMTV: became an employee for GSK during the publication development. 
PV: consulting or advisory role (personal) from Eli Lily and Company, MSD, 
Mundipharma, Novartis, Pfizer, and Roche; research funding from Tesaro. SH: 
consulting or advisory role (personal) from AstraZeneca, BMSi, Gilead Sciences, 
Merck, MSD Oncology, Novartis, and Sanofi. SA: consulting or advisory role 
(institutional, not personal) for MSD, Sanofi, Roche, BMS, and Pfizer; research 
funding (institutional, not personal) from Sanofi. AD: research funding 
(institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca. EN: travel and accommodation 
expenses (institutional, not personal) from AstraZeneca, Novartis, Pfizer, 
PharmaMar, Roche, and Teva. FA: consulting or advisory role (institutional, not 
personal) for MiMark. KV: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, not 
personal) from PharmaMar. HGD: travel and accommodation expenses (institutional, 
not personal) from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lily and Company, GSK, MSD, Novartis, 
Pfizer, PharmaMar, Roche, Tesaro, and Teva; research funding (institutional, not 
personal) from Roche. HH, ST, LL, RB, XBT, PAV, AH, OD, KKV, and BV: declare no 
competing interests.

1. Gut Pathog. 2024 Nov 7;16(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13099-024-00654-4.

Depletion of core microbiome forms the shared background against diverging 
dysbiosis patterns in Crohn's disease and intestinal tuberculosis: insights from 
an integrated multi-cohort analysis.

Bajaj A(#)(1), Markandey M(#)(1), Samal A(2), Goswami S(2), Vuyyuru SK(1), Mohta 
S(1), Kante B(1), Kumar P(1), Makharia G(1), Kedia S(1), Ghosh TS(3), Ahuja 
V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110029, India.
(2)Department of Computational Biology, Indraprastha Institute of Information 
Technology-Delhi, New Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Computational Biology, Indraprastha Institute of Information 
Technology-Delhi, New Delhi, India. tarini.ghosh@iiitd.ac.in.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, 110029, India. vineet.aiims@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Crohn's disease (CD) and intestinal tuberculosis (ITB) are 
gastrointestinal (GI) inflammatory disorders with overlapping clinical 
presentations but diverging etiologies. The study aims to decipher CD and 
ITB-associated gut dysbiosis signatures and identify disease-associated 
co-occurring modules to evaluate whether this dysbiosis signature is a 
disease-specific trait or is a shared feature across diseases of diverging 
etiologies.
METHODS: Disease-associated gut microbial modules were identified using 
statistical machine learning and co-abundance network analysis in controls, CD 
and ITB patients recruited as part of this study. Module reproducibility was 
reinvestigated through meta-network analysis encompassing >5400 bacteriomes and 
~900 mycobiomes. Subsequently, >1600 Indian gut microbiomes were analyzed to 
identify a central-core gut microbiome of 46 taxa, whose abundances aided in the 
formulation of an India-specific Core Gut Microbiome Score (CGMS) to measure the 
degree of core retention.
RESULTS: Both diseases witness similar patterns of alterations in 
[alpha]-diversity, characterized by a significant reduction in gut bacterial 
(i.e., bacterial/archaeal) diversity and a concomitant increase in the fungal 
[alpha]-diversity. Specific bacterial taxa, along with the diverging mycobiome 
enabled distinction between the diseases. Co-abundance network analysis of these 
taxa, validated by integrated meta-network analysis, revealed a 
'disease-depleted' module, consistent across multiple cohorts, with >75% of this 
module constituting the central-core Indian gut microbiome. CGMS robustly 
assessed the core-microbiome loss across different stages of gut inflammatory 
disorders, in Indian and international cohorts.
CONCLUSIONS: While the disease-specific gain of detrimental bacteria forms an 
important component of gut dysbiosis, loss of the core microbiome is a shared 
phenomenon contributing to various GI disorders.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13099-024-00654-4
PMCID: PMC11545864
PMID: 39511674

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2024 Nov 7;26(1):191. doi: 10.1186/s13075-024-03413-7.

Outgrowth of Escherichia is susceptible to aggravation of systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Gui L(#)(1), Zuo X(#)(2), Feng J(1), Wang M(3)(4), Chen Z(1), Sun Y(1), Qi J(1), 
Chen Z(5), Pathak JL(6), Zhang Y(1), Cui C(7), Zhang P(5), Guo X(1), Lv Q(1), 
Zhang X(1), Zhang Y(2), Gu J(8), Lin Z(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Guangzhou Institute of Pediatrics, Guangzhou 
Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Longgang Maternity and Child Institute of Shantou 
University Medical College (Longgang District Maternity & Child Healthcare 
Hospital of Shenzhen City), Shenzhen, China.
(4)Microbiome Therapy Center, Department of Experiment & Research, Medical 
School, South China Hospital, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)School and Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong Engineering Research Center of 
Oral Restoration and Reconstruction, Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Basic and 
Applied Research of Oral Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. gujieruo@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China. lzm-zj99@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is linked to host gut dysbiosis. 
Here we performed faecal gut microbiome sequencing to investigate SLE-pathogenic 
gut microbes and their potential mechanisms.
METHODS: There were 134 healthy controls (HCs) and 114 SLE cases for 16 S 
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing and 97 HCs and 124 SLE cases for shotgun 
metagenomics. Faecal microbial changes and associations with clinical phenotypes 
were evaluated, and SLE-associated microbial genera were identified in amplicon 
analysis. Next, metagenomic sequencing was applied for accurate identification 
of microbial species and discovery of their metabolic pathways and immunogenic 
peptides both relevant to SLE. Finally, contribution of specific taxa to disease 
development was confirmed by oral gavage into lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice.
RESULTS: SLE patients had gut microbiota richness reduction and composition 
alteration, particularly lupus nephritis and active patients. 
Proteobacteria/Bacteroidetes (P/B) ratio was remarkably up-regulated, and 
Escherichia was identified as the dominantly expanded genus in SLE, followed by 
metagenomics accurately located Escherichia coli and Escherichia unclassified 
species. Significant associations primarily appeared among Escherichia coli, 
metabolic pathways of purine nucleotide salvage or peptidoglycan maturation and 
SLE disease activity index (SLEDAI), and between multiple epitopes from 
Escherichia coli and disease activity or renal involvement phenotype. Finally, 
gavage with faecal Escherichia revealed that it upregulated lupus-associated 
serum traits and aggravated glomerular lesions in MRL/lpr mice.
CONCLUSION: We characterize a novel SLE exacerbating Escherichia outgrowth and 
suggest its contribution to SLE procession may be partially associated with 
metabolite changes and cross-reactivity of gut microbiota-associated epitopes 
and host autoantigens. The findings could provide a deeper insight into gut 
Escherichia in the procession of SLE.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13075-024-03413-7
PMCID: PMC11542361
PMID: 39511594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Nov 7;12(1):229. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01948-0.

Multimodal analysis identifies microbiome changes linked to stem cell 
transplantation-associated diseases.

Artacho A(#)(1), González-Torres C(#)(1), Gómez-Cebrián N(2), Moles-Poveda P(3), 
Pons J(1), Jiménez N(1), Casanova MJ(3), Montoro J(3), Balaguer A(3), Villalba 
M(3), Chorão P(3), Puchades-Carrasco L(2), Sanz J(4)(5)(6), Ubeda C(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Fundación Para El Fomento de La Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de La 
Comunitat Valenciana-FISABIO, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Drug Discovery Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain.
(3)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari I Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain.
(4)Hematology Department, Hospital Universitari I Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, 
Spain. jaime.sanz@uv.es.
(5)Departament de Medicina, Universitat de Valencia, Valencia, Spain. 
jaime.sanz@uv.es.
(6)CIBERONC, Instituto Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. jaime.sanz@uv.es.
(7)Fundación Para El Fomento de La Investigación Sanitaria y Biomédica de La 
Comunitat Valenciana-FISABIO, Valencia, Spain. carles.ubeda@fisabio.es.
(8)Centers of Biomedical Research Network (CIBER) in Epidemiology and Public 
Health, Madrid, Spain. carles.ubeda@fisabio.es.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) is 
one of the most efficient therapeutic options available to cure many 
hematological malignancies. However, severe complications derived from this 
procedure, including graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and infections, can limit 
its success and negatively impact survival. Previous studies have shown that 
alterations in the microbiome are associated with the development of 
allo-HSCT-derived complications. However, most studies relied on single 
techniques that can only analyze a unique aspect of the microbiome, which 
hinders our ability to understand how microbiome alterations drive 
allo-HSCT-associated diseases.
RESULTS: Here, we have applied multiple "omic" techniques (16S rRNA and shotgun 
sequencing, targeted and un-targeted metabolomics) in combination with machine 
learning approaches to define the most significant microbiome changes following 
allo-HSCT at multiple modalities (bacterial taxa, encoded functions, and derived 
metabolites). In addition, multivariate approaches were applied to study 
interactions among the various microbiome modalities (the interactome). Our 
results show that the microbiome of transplanted patients exhibits substantial 
changes in all studied modalities. These include depletion of beneficial 
microbes, mainly from the Clostridiales order, loss of their bacterial encoded 
functions required for the synthesis of key metabolites, and a reduction in 
metabolic end products such as short chain fatty acids (SCFAs). These changes 
were followed by an expansion of bacteria that frequently cause infections after 
allo-HSCT, including several Staphylococcus species, which benefit from the 
reduction of bacteriostatic SCFAs. Additionally, we found specific alterations 
in all microbiome modalities that distinguished those patients who subsequently 
developed GVHD, including depletion of anti-inflammatory commensals, protective 
reactive oxygen detoxifying enzymes, and immunoregulatory metabolites such as 
acetate or malonate. Moreover, extensive shifts in the homeostatic relationship 
between bacteria and their metabolic products (e.g., Faecalibacterium and 
butyrate) were detected mainly in patients who later developed GVHD.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified specific microbiome changes at different 
modalities (microbial taxa, their encoded genes, and synthetized metabolites) 
and at the interface between them (the interactome) that precede the development 
of complications associated with allo-HSCT. These identified microbial features 
provide novel targets for the design of microbiome-based strategies to prevent 
diseases associated with stem cell transplantation. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01948-0
PMCID: PMC11542268
PMID: 39511587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Microb Pathog. 2024 Dec;197:107106. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.107106. Epub 
2024 Nov 6.

Analyses of the gut microbial composition of domestic pig louse Haematopinus 
suis.

Deng YP(1), Yao C(2), Fu YT(3), Zhuo Y(1), Zou JL(1), Pan HY(1), Peng YY(1), Liu 
GH(4).

Author information:
(1)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.
(2)Ross University School of Veterinary Medicine and One Health Center for 
Zoonoses and Tropical Infectious Diseases, Ross University School of Veterinary 
Medicine, Basseterre, Saint Kitts and Nevis.
(3)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China; Department of 
Parasitology, Xiangya School of Basic Medicine, Central South University, 
Changsha, Hunan Province, China.
(4)Research Center for Parasites & Vectors, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China. Electronic 
address: liuguohua5202008@163.com.

Haematopinus suis is an obligatory ectoparasite of the domestic pig, serving as 
a vector of several swine pathogens and posing great threats to the pig 
industry. The gut microbiome of lice is thought of an important mediator of 
their healthy physiology. However, there is a great paucity of lice-associated 
microbial communities' structure and function. The current study aimed to 
profile the gut microbiome and to understand the microbial functions of swine 
lice by metagenomic sequencing and bioinformatics analyses. In total, 102,358 
(77.2 %) nonredundant genes were cataloged, by contrast, only a small proportion 
of genes were assigned to microbial taxa and functional assemblages. Bacteria of 
known or potential public health significance such as Anaplasma phagocytophilum, 
Chlamydia trachomatis, Waddlia chondrophila, Bacillus cereus, and Leptotrichia 
goodfellowii were observed in all samples. The integrated microbial profile 
further illustrated the evolutionary relevance of endosymbionts and detailed the 
functional composition, and findings suggested H. suis may acquire 
adenosylcobalamin by feeding due to an adenosylcobalamin synthesis defect and a 
lack of complete synthases of endosymbionts. Sucking lice contained fewer 
functional genes compared with ticks and fleas probably because of the obligate 
host specificity of parasitic lice. In addition, the genes from the intestines 
contained encompassed most of the microbial functional genes in sucking lice. A 
wide range of unknown taxonomic and functional assemblages were discovered, 
which improves our understanding related to microbial features and physiological 
activities of sucking lice. In general, this study increases the 
characterization of the microbiota of lice and offers clues for preventing and 
controlling lice infestation in swine production in the future.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.micpath.2024.107106
PMID: 39510362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that all authors have read this original article and had no conflict of 
interest.

1. Neuroimage. 2024 Dec 1;303:120918. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120918. Epub
 2024 Nov 5.

Characterizing the role of the microbiota-gut-brain axis in cerebral small 
vessel disease: An integrative multi‑omics study.

Song Y(1), Zhou X(2), Zhao H(1), Zhao W(1), Sun Z(3), Zhu J(4), Yu Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230022, PR China; Research Center of Clinical Medical Imaging, 
Anhui Province, Hefei 230032, PR China; Anhui Provincial Institute of 
Translational Medicine, Hefei 230032, PR China; Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory 
for Brain Bank Construction and Resource Utilization, Hefei 230032, PR China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230022, PR China.
(3)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230022, PR China. Electronic address: sunzhwu@126.com.
(4)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230022, PR China; Research Center of Clinical Medical Imaging, 
Anhui Province, Hefei 230032, PR China; Anhui Provincial Institute of 
Translational Medicine, Hefei 230032, PR China; Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory 
for Brain Bank Construction and Resource Utilization, Hefei 230032, PR China. 
Electronic address: zhujiajiagraduate@163.com.
(5)Department of Radiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei 230022, PR China; Research Center of Clinical Medical Imaging, 
Anhui Province, Hefei 230032, PR China; Anhui Provincial Institute of 
Translational Medicine, Hefei 230032, PR China; Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory 
for Brain Bank Construction and Resource Utilization, Hefei 230032, PR China. 
Electronic address: cjr.yuyongqiang@vip.163.com.

BACKGROUND: Prior efforts have revealed changes in gut microbiome, circulating 
metabolome, and multimodal neuroimaging features in cerebral small vessel 
disease (CSVD). However, there is a paucity of research integrating the 
multi-omic information to characterize the role of the microbiota-gut-brain axis 
in CSVD.
METHODS: We collected gut microbiome, fecal and blood metabolome, multimodal 
magnetic resonance imaging data from 37 CSVD patients with white matter 
hyperintensities and 46 healthy controls. Between-group comparison was performed 
to identify the differential gut microbial taxa, followed by performance of 
multi-stage microbiome-metabolome-neuroimaging-neuropsychology correlation 
analyses in CSVD patients.
RESULTS: Our data showed both depleted and enriched gut microbes in CSVD 
patients. Among the differential microbes, Haemophilus and Akkermansia were 
associated with a range of metabolites enriched for Aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis 
pathway. Furthermore, the affected metabolites were associated with neuroimaging 
measures involving gray matter morphology, spontaneous intrinsic brain activity, 
white matter integrity, and global structural network topology, which were in 
turn related to cognition and emotion in CSVD patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings provide an integrative framework to understand the 
pathophysiological mechanisms underlying the interplay between gut microbiota 
dysbiosis and CSVD, highlighting the potential of targeting the 
microbiota-gut-brain axis as a therapeutic strategy in CSVD patients.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2024.120918
PMID: 39505226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interests.

1. Thromb Res. 2024 Dec;244:109204. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2024.109204. Epub
2024  Oct 31.

Microbial signatures in chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension thrombi: 
Insights from metagenomic profiling of fresh and organized thrombi.

Zheng X(1), Xu M(2), Zhang Z(3), Yang L(4), Liu X(1), Zhen Y(1), Ye Z(1), Wen 
J(5), Liu P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China; Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of Clinical 
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)China-Japan Friendship Hospital (Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences), 
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, China.
(5)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China. Electronic address: jianyanwen@sina.com.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, 
Beijing, China; Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of Clinical 
Medicine, Beijing, China. Electronic address: liupeng6618@yeah.net.

OBJECTIVE: Many studies have reported microbial signatures in thrombi at major 
vascular sites, such as the coronary artery and the middle cerebral artery, 
which are critical for maintaining proper blood flow and oxygenation. Chronic 
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) is a condition involving 
non-resolving thrombosis that has not been fully studied. This study explored 
the microbial taxonomy and functional profiles of both fresh and organized 
thrombi associated with CTEPH to investigate the role of microbiota in thrombus 
non-resolving.
METHODS: In this study, 12 CTEPH fresh thrombi and 12 organized thrombi were 
collected from 14 patients with CTEPH. Metagenomic sequencing was employed to 
explore the genomic information of all microorganisms in the thrombus samples.
RESULTS: Our data demonstrated a diverse range of microorganisms in CTEPH 
thrombi, whether fresh or organized. Notably, a considerable proportion (54.7 %) 
of sequencing data could not be classified into the relative microbial taxa, 
highlighting the complexity and novelty of the thrombus ecosystem. Although 
there were no significant differences in microbial community structure between 
the two groups, the abundance of dominant microbial species varied. Leuconostoc 
sp. DORA 2, Staphylococcus aureus, and Aliidongia dinghuensis were common 
dominant species in CTEPH thrombus. Organized thrombus significantly increased 
the relative abundance of Staphylococcus aureus, which was confirmed to 
effectively distinguish between organized and fresh thrombi by LeFSe analysis 
and random forest analysis. Functional annotation using both the KEGG and eggNOG 
databases revealed that organized thrombi exhibit stronger metabolic functions, 
particularly in amino acid metabolism.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that microbial composition and function may 
play an important role in thrombus organization. Targeting inflammation to 
prevent thrombosis presents promising opportunities for further research in this 
area.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2024.109204
PMID: 39499979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Nov 4;12(1):228. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01941-7.

Nepali oral microbiomes reflect a gradient of lifestyles from traditional to 
industrialized.

Ryu EP(1), Gautam Y(2), Proctor DM(3), Bhandari D(4)(5), Tandukar S(4)(6), Gupta 
M(1)(7), Gautam GP(8), Relman DA(9)(10)(11), Shibl AA(2)(12), Sherchand JB(4), 
Jha AR(13)(14), Davenport ER(15)(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA.
(2)Genetic Heritage Group, Program in Biology, New York University Abu Dhabi, 
Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, McGovern Medical School, 
The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Public Health Research Laboratory, Institute of Medicine, Maharajgunj, 
Kathmandu, Nepal.
(5)School of Public Health, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(6)Organization for Public Health and Environment Management, Lalitpur, Bagmati, 
Nepal.
(7)Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Philadelphia, PA, UAE.
(8)Department of Geography, Tribhuvan University, Nepalgunj, Nepal.
(9)Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(11)Section of Infectious Diseases, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care 
System, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(12)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, and Public Health Research Center, 
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE.
(13)Genetic Heritage Group, Program in Biology, New York University Abu Dhabi, 
Abu Dhabi, UAE. jhaar@nyu.edu.
(14)Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, and Public Health Research Center, 
New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, UAE. jhaar@nyu.edu.
(15)Department of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, 
USA. emily.davenport@psu.edu.
(16)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA, USA. emily.davenport@psu.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jul 03:2024.07.01.601557. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.01.601557.

BACKGROUND: Lifestyle plays an important role in shaping the gut microbiome. 
However, its contributions to the oral microbiome remain less clear, due to the 
confounding effects of geography and methodology in investigations of 
populations studied to date. Furthermore, while the oral microbiome seems to 
differ between foraging and industrialized populations, we lack insight into 
whether transitions to and away from agrarian lifestyles shape the oral 
microbiota. Given the growing interest in so-called "vanishing microbiomes" 
potentially being a risk factor for increased disease prevalence in 
industrialized populations, it is important that we distinguish lifestyle from 
geography in the study of microbiomes across populations.
RESULTS: Here, we investigate salivary microbiomes of 63 Nepali individuals 
representing a spectrum of lifestyles: foraging, subsistence farming 
(individuals that transitioned from foraging to farming within the last 
50 years), agriculturalists (individuals that have transitioned to farming for 
at least 300 years), and industrialists (expatriates that immigrated to the USA 
within the last 20 years). We characterize the role of lifestyle in microbial 
diversity, identify microbes that differ between lifestyles, and pinpoint 
specific lifestyle factors that may be contributing to differences in the 
microbiomes across populations. Contrary to prevailing views, when geography is 
controlled for, oral microbiome alpha diversity does not differ significantly 
across lifestyles. Microbiome composition, however, follows the gradient of 
lifestyles from foraging through agrarianism to industrialism, supporting the 
notion that lifestyle indeed plays a role in the oral microbiome. Relative 
abundances of several individual taxa, including Streptobacillus and an 
unclassified Porphyromonadaceae genus, also mirror lifestyle. Finally, we 
identify specific lifestyle factors associated with microbiome composition 
across the gradient of lifestyles, including smoking and grain sources.
CONCLUSION: Our findings demonstrate that by studying populations within Nepal, 
we can isolate an important role of lifestyle in determining oral microbiome 
composition. In doing so, we highlight the potential contributions of several 
lifestyle factors, underlining the importance of carefully examining the oral 
microbiome across lifestyles to improve our understanding of global microbiomes. 
Video Abstract.

Publisher: सारांश पृष्ठभूमि: मानवको आन्द्रामा ब्याक्टेरिया, भाइरस, फंगस (ढुसी), 
लगायत अरू विभिन्न प्रकारका सूक्ष्मजीवहरूका समुदाय पाईन्छन्, जसलाई माइक्रोबायोम 
भनिन्छ। आन्द्रामा हुने माइक्रोबायोमले मानवको पाचन, प्रतिरक्षा प्रणाली, र अन्य 
शारीरिक प्रक्रियाहरूमा योगदान पुर्याउने हुनाले यिनले मानव स्वास्थ्य र रोगको 
निर्धारण गर्नमा महत्त्वपूर्ण भूमिका खेल्छन्। त्यसैगरी मानव मुखमा पनि 
सूक्ष्मजीवहरूका समुदायहरू हुन्छन् जसले दाँत र गिजालाई स्वस्थ राख्नमा योगदान 
पुर्‍याउँछन्। जीवनशैलीले आन्द्राको माइक्रोबायोमलाई आकार दिन महत्त्वपूर्ण भूमिका 
खेल्छ। साथै, जङलमा निर्भर भएर प्रकृतिक जीवनशैली जिउने र औध्योगिक्रित भएका मानव 
समुदायहरुको बीच मुखको माइक्रोबायोममा धेरै भिन्नता देखिन्छ। जङलमा निर्भर भएर 
प्रकृतिक जीवनशैली जिउने मानव समुदायहरुमा पाईने धेरै सूक्ष्मजीवहरू औद्योगिक 
जनसमुदायहरुमा मा पाईन छाडिसकेका छन् र यस्ता ‘विलुप्त माइक्रोबायोम’ बिभिन्न 
रोगहरुका जोखिमका कारक हुन सक्ने हुँदा चासोका बिषय बन्न पुगेका छन्। तथापि, 
अहिलेसम्मका अनुसन्धानमा जीवनशैलिको परिवर्तन सँगै मुखको माइक्रोबायोममा के कस्ता 
परिवर्तनहरु आउँछन् भन्ने कुरा स्पष्ट हुन सकेको छैन। विभिन्न जीवनशैली ब्यथीत 
गर्ने मानिसहरु बीच जीवनशैलीको साथसाथै भौगोलिक भिन्नता पनि हुने गर्दछ। तसर्थ, 
मनिसहरुका मुखका माईक्रोबायोममा जीवनशैली र भूगोलको असरलाई छुट्याउनु महत्त्वपूर्ण 
देखिएको छ। परिणामहरू: यहाँ, हामीले ६३ जना नेपाली व्यक्तिको थुक संकलन गरेर मुखका 
माइक्रोबायोमको अनुसन्धान गर्यौं। हाम्रो अध्ययनमा संलग्न भएका ब्यक्तिहरुले 
विभिन्न जीवनशैलीको प्रतिनिधित्व गर्छन्: जङलमा निर्भर भएर प्रकृतिक जीवनशैली 
जिउने, जङलबाट कृषितर्फ हालसालै परिवर्तन भएका (अन्तिम ५० वर्ष भित्र), कृषक 
(बिगतका ३०० वर्ष भन्दा बढी समयदेखि कृषिमा संलग्न भएका), र औद्योगिक (अन्तिम २० 
वर्ष भित्र संयुक्त राज्य अमेरिका मा आप्रवासन गरेका नेपालीहरु)। हामीले यस् 
अध्ययनमा जीवनशैलीले मुखका माईक्रोबायोमको विविधतामा कसरी योगदान पुर्याउँछन् भन्ने 
कुरको विश्लेषण गरेका छौं, जीवनशैलीहरू बीच फरक पर्ने सूक्ष्मजीवहरूको पहिचान गरेका 
छौं, र माइक्रोबायोममा फरक पार्ने कारकहरूको पहिचान गरेका छौं। प्रचलित 
दृष्टिकोणहरू विपरीत, भूगोललाई नियन्त्रण गर्दा, बिभिन्न जीवनशैलीहरू बीच मुखको 
माइक्रोबायोममा हुने सूक्ष्मजीवहरूको सन्ख्या (अल्फा विविधता) मा धेरै फरक देखिएन, 
तर मुखको माइक्रोबायोमको संरचना भने जीवनशैलीको क्रमिक चरणसँग मिल्दोजुल्दो देखियो, 
जसले देखाउँछ कि जीवनशैलीले मुखको माइक्रोबायोममा को संरचना निर्धारण गर्न एउटा 
प्रमुख भूमिका खेल्दछ। स्ट्रेप्टोबासिलस र असम्प्रेषित पोरफिरोमोनाडासिए जीनस 
सहितका केही सूक्ष्मजीवहरूको सापेक्ष सापेक्षिक प्रचुरता पनि जीवनशैलीसँग मेल खाने 
हामीले यस् अध्ययनबाट थाहा पाएका छौं। अन्ततः, हामीले जीवनशैलीको क्रमिक चरणमा 
माइक्रोबायोम संरचनासँग सम्बन्धित विशिष्ट जीवनशैलीसँग आबद्ध हुने धूम्रपान र अनाज 
जस्ता कारकहरूको पहिचान गरेका छौं। निष्कर्ष: हाम्रा निष्कर्षहरूले प्रष्ट परेका छन 
कि भूगोललाई नियन्त्रण गर्दा, हाम्रो जीवनशैलीले हाम्रा मुखको माइक्रोबायोमको 
संरचना निर्धारण गर्ने महत्त्वपूर्ण भूमिका खेल्दो रहेछ। यस् अध्ययनले मानव 
समुदायहरुमा मुखको माइक्रोबायोमको अध्ययन गरेमा माइक्रोबायोमबारेको हाम्रो बुझाइमा 
सुधार ल्याउन सकिने पनि देखाउँछ। बढ्दो शहरीकरण सँगसँगै नेपालीहरुको माइक्रोबायोममा 
परिवर्तन हुँदै गरेको र यस्ता परिवर्तनहरुले नेपालीहरुमा बिभिन्न दीर्घकालीन 
रोगहरुको व्यापकता बढाउन सक्ने हुनाले यस् सम्बन्धमा उपर्योक्त निकायहरुको 
ध्यानाकर्षण हुनुपर्ने आवश्यकता पनि यस् अध्ययनले प्रष्ट पारेको छ।.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01941-7
PMCID: PMC11533410
PMID: 39497165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Parasit Vectors. 2024 Nov 4;17(1):448. doi: 10.1186/s13071-024-06512-1.

Deciphering the microbial communities in ticks of Inner Mongolia: ecological 
determinants and pathogen profiles.

Li C(1), Ma R(1), Gao A(1), Jiang N(1), Sang C(1), Zhang Y(1), Tian H(1), Li 
J(2)(3), Hu W(4)(5), Feng X(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, China.
(2)School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, China. 
leejianshin@163.com.
(3)Basic Medical College, Guangxi Traditional Chinese Medical University, 
Nanning, 530005, Guangxi, China. leejianshin@163.com.
(4)School of Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, 010070, China. 
huw@imu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, State Key Laboratory of 
Genetic Engineering, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Biodiversity 
Science and Ecological Engineering, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of 
Contemporary Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
200438, China. huw@imu.edu.cn.
(6)School of Global Health, Chinese Center for Tropical Diseases Research, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 20025, China. 
fengxinyu2013@163.com.
(7)One Health Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University-The University of Edinburgh, 
Shanghai, 20025, China. fengxinyu2013@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Ticks are vectors of numerous pathogens, with their bacterial 
composition, abundance, diversity, and interaction influencing both their growth 
and disease transmission efficiency. Despite the abundance of ticks in Inner 
Mongolia, China, comprehensive data on their microbial communities are lacking. 
This study aims to analyze the microbial communities within ticks from Inner 
Mongolia to inform innovative control strategies for interrupting pathogen 
transmission.
METHODS: Tick samples were collected from animals and vegetation in multiple 
locations across Inner Mongolia and stored at - 80 °C. Ticks were identified 
using morphological keys and molecular biology methods. Full-length 16S rRNA 
gene sequencing was performed on collected samples. Bacterial community 
composition and diversity were mainly analyzed using bioinformatic tools such as 
QIIME, phyloseq, and DESeq2. Alpha diversity was assessed using Chao1, ACE, and 
Shannon indices, while beta diversity was evaluated using Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarity matrices. LEfSe analysis was applied to identify taxa associated 
with ecological and biological variables.
RESULTS: A total of 5,048,137 high-quality read counts were obtained, forming an 
average of 789.3 OTUs per sample. Proteobacteria, Firmicutes, and Bacteroidetes 
were the most dominant phyla. Bacterial community composition varied 
significantly with geography, with Dermacentor nuttalli showing a higher 
abundance of Rickettsia in Xilingol League, while other regions had different 
dominant genera. The microbial community also differed based on the feeding 
status of ticks. Additionally, the microbiota of engorged ticks showed organ 
specificity. Pathogen detection efforts revealed the presence of nine pathogens 
across all three tick species. D. nuttalli was found to carry a significantly 
higher burden of pathogenic bacteria, making it the most potentially threatening 
tick species in Inner Mongolia.
CONCLUSIONS: The study highlights significant variations in tick microbiomes 
influenced by geographic location, feeding status, and tick species. It 
underscores the importance of enhancing tick and tick-borne disease surveillance 
in Inner Mongolia for early detection and control of emerging pathogens.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-024-06512-1
PMCID: PMC11533347
PMID: 39497080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2024 Nov 20;90(11):e0131224. doi:
10.1128/aem.01312-24.  Epub 2024 Nov 4.

Fire-associated microbial shifts in soils of western conifer forests with 
Armillaria root disease.

Fitz Axen AJ(1), Kim M-S(2), Klopfenstein NB(3), Ashiglar S(4), Hanna JW(3), 
Bennett P(3), Stewart JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Agricultural Biology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, 
Colorado, USA.
(2)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station, Corvallis, Oregon, USA.
(3)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research 
Station, Moscow, Idaho, USA.
(4)U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Nez Perce-Clearwater National 
Forests, Potlach, Idaho, USA.

Fires in coniferous forests throughout the northern United States alter 
ecosystem processes and ecological communities, including the diversity and 
composition of microbial communities living in the soil. In addition to its 
influence on ecosystem processes and functions, the soil microbiome can interact 
with soilborne pathogens to facilitate or suppress plant disease development. 
Altering the microbiome composition to promote taxa that inhibit pathogenic 
activity has been suggested as a management strategy for forest diseases, 
including Armillaria root disease caused by Armillaria solidipes, which causes 
growth loss and mortality of conifers. These forest ecosystems are experiencing 
increased wildfire burn severity that could influence A. solidipes activity and 
interactions of the soil microbiome with Armillaria root disease. In this 
research, we examine changes to the soil microbiome following three levels of 
burn severity in a coniferous forest in northern Idaho, United States, where 
Armillaria root disease is prevalent. We further determine how these changes 
correspond to the soil microbiomes associated with the pathogen A. solidipes, 
and a putatively beneficial species, A. altimontana. At 15-months post-fire, we 
found significant differences in richness and diversity between bacterial 
communities associated with unburned and burned areas, yet no significant 
changes to these metrics were found in fungal communities following fire. 
However, both bacterial and fungal communities showed compositional changes 
associated with burn severity, including microbial taxa with altered relative 
abundance. Further, significant differences in the relative abundance of certain 
microbial taxa in communities associated with the three burn severity levels 
overlapped with taxa associated with various Armillaria spp. Following severe 
burn, we observed a decreased relative abundance of beneficial ectomycorrhizal 
fungi associated with the microbial communities of A. altimontana, which may 
contribute to the antagonistic activity of this soil microbial community. 
Additionally, A. solidipes and associated microbial taxa were found to dominate 
following high-severity burns, suggesting that severe fires provide suitable 
environmental conditions for these species. Overall, our results suggest that 
shifts in the soil microbiome and an associated increase in the activity of A. 
solidipes following high-severity burns in similar conifer forests may result in 
priority areas for monitoring and proactive management of Armillaria root 
disease.
IMPORTANCE: With its influence on ecosystem processes and functions, the soil 
microbiome can interact with soilborne pathogens to facilitate or suppress plant 
disease development. These forest ecosystems are experiencing increased wildfire 
frequency and burn severity that could influence the fungal root pathogen, 
Armillaria solidipes, and interactions with the soil microbiome. We examined 
changes to the soil microbiome following three levels of burn severity, and 
examined how these changes correspond with A. solidipes, and a putatively 
beneficial species, A. altimontana. Following severe burn, there was a decreased 
relative abundance of ectomycorrhizal fungi associated A. altimontana. A. 
solidipes and associated microbial taxa dominated following high-severity burns, 
suggesting that severe fires provide suitable environmental conditions for these 
species. Our results suggest that shifts in the soil microbiome and an 
associated increase in the activity of A. solidipes following high-severity 
burns in conifer forests may result in priority areas for monitoring and 
proactive management of Armillaria root disease.

DOI: 10.1128/aem.01312-24
PMCID: PMC11577770
PMID: 39495026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Oct 18;15:1442208. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1442208. 
eCollection 2024.

Ecological shifts in soil microbiota and root rot disease progress during 
ginseng monoculture.

Cho G(1), Kim DR(2), Kwak YS(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Agricultural Microbiology, National Institute of Agriculture 
Science, Rural Development Administration, Wanju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Division of Applied Life Science, RILS, Gyeongsang National University, 
Jinju, Republic of Korea.

INTRODUCTION: The phenomenon in which the damage of plant diseases is suppressed 
by continuous cropping is defined as "suppressiveness" and the development of 
suppressive soils and key beneficial microorganisms have been identified through 
various previous studies. However, no studies have been conducted on microbial 
communities related to disease occurrence before the initial occurrence of 
diseases in crop monoculture.
METHODS: We aimed to investigate the ecological modifications of pathogen 
population density in soil, disease occurrence rate, and microbiota community 
shifting during ginseng monoculture to better understand the tripartite social 
relationships in the monoculture system. To achieve the study's objectives, a 
long-term monoculture of ginseng was established. The microbial diversity and 
community structure were analyzed using high-throughput sequencing, and the 
pathogen population density and disease occurrence rate were determined using 
qPCR and observation.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The results showed that the initial rhizosphere 
bacterial community of ginseng had already collapsed before the development of 
the root rot disease. The study also identified the crucial role of soil-borne 
pathogens in causing disease and the loss of initial keystone taxa populations 
in the early stages of monoculture. Our study revealed a novel aspect of soil 
microbiota dynamics during ginseng monoculture, with seven distinct microbes 
(Beijerinckiaceae, Comamonadaceae, Devosiaceae, Rhizobiaceae, 
Sphingobacteriaceae, Sphingomonadaceae, and Xanthomonadaceae) participating in 
soil nitrogen metabolism as an 'initial community' that regulates root rot 
disease through nutritional competition. The findings contribute to ecological 
research on disease-suppressiveness soil, disease management, and sustainable 
agriculture.

Copyright © 2024 Cho, Kim and Kwak.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1442208
PMCID: PMC11530993
PMID: 39493853

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2024 Nov 4. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000001131. Online
ahead  of print.

The bronchiectasis microbiome: current understanding and treatment implications.

Narayana JK(1), Mac Aogáin M(2)(3), Hansbro PM(4), Chotirmall SH(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, St. James's Hospital.
(3)School of Medicine, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(4)Centre for Inflammation, Centenary Institute and University of Technology 
Sydney, Faculty of Science, School of Life Sciences, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, 
Singapore, Singapore.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Advances in DNA sequencing and analysis of the respiratory 
microbiome highlight its close association with bronchiectasis phenotypes, 
revealing fresh opportunities for diagnosis, stratification, and personalized 
clinical intervention. An under-recognized condition, bronchiectasis is 
increasingly the subject of recent large-scale, multicentre, and longitudinal 
clinical studies including detailed analysis of the microbiome. In this review, 
we summarize recent progress in our understanding of the bronchiectasis 
microbiome within the context of its potential use in treatment decisions.
RECENT FINDINGS: Diverse microbiome profiles exist in bronchiectasis, in line 
with the established disease heterogeneity including treatment response. 
Classical microbiology has established Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Haemophilus 
influenza as two microbial markers of disease, while holistic microbiome 
analysis has uncovered important associations with less common bacterial taxa 
including commensal an/or pathobiont species, including the emerging role of the 
fungal mycobiome, virome, and interactome. Integration of airway microbiomes 
with other high-dimensional biological and clinical datasets holds significant 
promise to determining treatable traits and mechanisms of disease related to the 
microbiome.
SUMMARY: The bronchiectasis microbiome is an emerging and key area of study with 
significant implications for understanding bronchiectasis, influencing treatment 
decisions and ultimately improving patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000001131
PMID: 39492755

1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2023 Oct 27:110886. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110886. Online ahead of print.

Identifying and ranking causal association between gut microbiota and 
neuroticism.

Yang J(1), Yang Z(2), Wu Y(3), Zhao T(3), Wu Y(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine Center; Department of Infectious 
disease, Hangzhou Normal University Affiliated Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China; Institute of Hepatology and Metabolic Diseases, Hangzhou Normal 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address: hz_zhiy@163.com.
(2)School of Music, Zhejiang Vocational Academy of Art, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(3)Department of Translational Medicine Center; Department of Infectious 
disease, Hangzhou Normal University Affiliated Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 
China.
(4)Department of social science, Communication University of Zhejiang, Hangzhou, 
Zhejiang, China; Institute of Hepatology and Metabolic Diseases, Hangzhou Normal 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. Electronic address: wuyin@cuz.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies had explored that gut microbiota was associated with 
personality traits through the gut-brain axis. Nevertheless, the fundamental 
causality remained obscure.
METHODS: Mendelian randomization (MR) was used to investigate the causal 
relationship between gut microbiota, metabolites and neuroticism-related traits. 
Summary data-based Mendelian randomization (SMR) was utilized to identify genes 
associated pleiotropically with microbial taxa.
RESULTS: MR analyses identified reliable causal evidence of 20 bacterial taxa 
related to neuroticism and its worry or depressed affect sub-cluster. A higher 
relative abundance of the Ruminococcus gauvreauii genus was associated with a 
higher risk of neuroticism [odds ratio (OR) = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.06, 
P = 2.85 × 10-3], depressed affect [OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.06, 
P = 5.50 × 10-3] and worry (OR = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02-1.06, P = 7.81 × 10-4), 
respectively. We identified the probes tagging CPSF1, that showed pleiotropic 
association with Ruminococcus gauvreauii in brain or colon tissues. Finally, we 
provided evidence that Ruminococcus gauvreauii present causal association with 
the neurotransmitter such as glutamine and glutamate.
CONCLUSIONS: This study implied a causal relationship between the gut microbiome 
composition, metabolites and neuroticism, thus providing novel insights into the 
gut microbiota-mediated development mechanism of neuroticism.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2023.110886
PMID: 39491125

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. J Mol Biol. 2024 Dec 1;436(23):168841. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2024.168841. Epub
2024  Oct 26.

GEMimp: An Accurate and Robust Imputation Method for Microbiome Data Using Graph 
Embedding Neural Network.

Sun Z(1), Song K(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China. 
Electronic address: m15623258617_2@163.com.
(2)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China. 
Electronic address: ksong@qdu.edu.cn.

Microbiome research has increasingly underscored the profound link between 
microbial compositions and human health, with numerous studies establishing a 
strong correlation between microbiome characteristics and various diseases. 
However, the analysis of microbiome data is frequently compromised by inherent 
sparsity issues, characterized by a substantial presence of observed zeros. 
These zeros not only skew the abundance distribution of microbial species but 
also undermine the reliability of scientific conclusions drawn from such data. 
Addressing this challenge, we introduce GEMimp, an innovative imputation method 
designed to infuse robustness into microbiome data analysis. GEMimp leverages 
the node2vec algorithm, which incorporates both Breadth-First Search (BFS) and 
Depth-First Search (DFS) strategies in its random walks sampling process. This 
approach enables GEMimp to learn nuanced, low-dimensional representations of 
each taxonomic unit, facilitating the reconstruction of their similarity 
networks with unprecedented accuracy. Our comparative analysis pits GEMimp 
against state-of-the-art imputation methods including SAVER, MAGIC and mbImpute. 
The results unequivocally demonstrate that GEMimp outperforms its counterparts 
by achieving the highest Pearson correlation coefficient when compared to the 
original raw dataset. Furthermore, GEMimp shows notable proficiency in 
identifying significant taxa, enhancing the detection of disease-related taxa 
and effectively mitigating the impact of sparsity on both simulated and 
real-world datasets, such as those pertaining to Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) and 
Colorectal Cancer (CRC). These findings collectively highlight the strong 
effectiveness of GEMimp, allowing for better analysis on microbial data. With 
alleviation of sparsity issues, it could be greatly facilitated in downstream 
analyses and even in the field of microbiology.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2024.168841
PMID: 39490678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Curr Microbiol. 2024 Nov 3;81(12):439. doi: 10.1007/s00284-024-03969-2.

Deciphering Phyllomicrobiome of Cauliflower Leaf: Revelation by Metagenomic and 
Microbiological Analysis of Tolerant and Susceptible Genotypes Against Black Rot 
Disease.

Geat N(1)(2), Singh D(3)(4), Saha P(5), Jatoth R(6), Babu PL(1), Devi GSR(7), 
Lakhran L(2), Singh D(8).

Author information:
(1)Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New 
Delhi, 110012, India.
(2)Agricultural Research Station, Mandor, Agriculture University, Jodhpur, 
342304, Rajasthan, India.
(3)Division of Plant Pathology, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New 
Delhi, 110012, India. dinesh_iari@rediffmail.com.
(4)Division of Crop Protection, ICAR- Indian Institute of Sugarcane Research, 
Lucknow, 226002, India. dinesh_iari@rediffmail.com.
(5)Division of Vegetable Science, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, 
New Delhi, 110012, India.
(6)Agriculture College, Sircilla, Professor Jayashanker Telangana State 
Agricultural University Hyderabad, Telangana, 500030, India.
(7)Indian Grassland Forage Research Institute, Regional Station, Dharwad, 
580005, Karnataka, India.
(8)Division of Plant Improvement and Pest Management, ICAR-Central Arid Zone 
Research Institute, Jodhpur, 342003, India. devendraiari@gmail.com.

Understanding the phyllomicrobiome dynamics in cauliflower plants holds 
significant promise for enhancing crop resilience against black rot disease, 
caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris. In this study, the culturable 
microbiome and metagenomic profile of tolerant (BR-161) and susceptible (Pusa 
Sharad) cauliflower genotypes were investigated to elucidate microbial 
interactions associated with disease tolerance. Isolation of phyllospheric 
bacteria from asymptomatic and black rot disease symptomatic leaves of tolerant 
and susceptible cultivars yielded 46 diverse bacterial isolates. Molecular 
identification via 16S rRNA sequencing revealed differences in the diversity of 
microbial taxa between genotypes and health conditions. Metagenomic profiling 
using next-generation sequencing elucidated distinct microbial communities, with 
higher diversity observed in black rot disease symptomatic leaf of BR-161. Alpha 
and beta diversity indices highlighted differences in microbial community 
structure and composition between genotypes and health conditions. Taxonomic 
analysis revealed a core microbiome consisting of genera such as Xanthomonas, 
Psychrobacillus, Lactobacillus, and Pseudomonas across all the samples. 
Validation through microbiological methods confirmed the presence of these key 
genera. The findings provide novel insights into the phyllomicrobiome of black 
rot-tolerant and susceptible genotypes of cauliflower. Harnessing beneficial 
microbial communities identified in this study offers promising avenues for 
developing sustainable strategies to manage black rot disease and enhance 
cauliflower crop health and productivity.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-024-03969-2
PMID: 39488668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Nov 1;24(1):444. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03612-x.

Vaginal microbiota in term pregnant women with differences in cervical ripeness 
revealed by 2bRAD-M.

Lu S(1)(2), Wu Q(1)(3), He W(1), Du X(1), Cui Q(1), Yang Y(4)(5)(6)(7), Yin 
Z(8)(9)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China.
(2)NHC Key Laboratory of the Study of Abnormal Gametes and the Reproductive 
Tract, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China.
(3)Jin'an Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Lu An, 237006, Anhui 
Province, China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China. 
wlj69513@sina.com.
(5)Engineering Research Center of Biopreservation and Artificial Organs, 
Ministry of Education, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. 
wlj69513@sina.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, No 81 
Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. wlj69513@sina.com.
(7)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Disorders and Obstetrics and 
Gynecology Diseases, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. 
wlj69513@sina.com.
(8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China. 
dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.
(9)NHC Key Laboratory of the Study of Abnormal Gametes and the Reproductive 
Tract, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230022, Anhui Province, China. 
dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.
(10)Key Laboratory of Population Health Across Life Cycle (Anhui Medical 
University), Ministry of Education of the People's Republic of China, No 81 
Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.
(11)Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Reproductive Disorders and Obstetrics and 
Gynecology Diseases, No 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, 230022, Anhui, China. 
dr_yinzongzhi@qq.com.

BACKGROUND: Cervical ripening is a multifactorial outcome, and the association 
between cervical ripening and vaginal microbiota remains unexplored in term 
primiparous women. A new sequencing technology, microbiome 2bRAD sequencing 
(2bRAD-M) that provides a higher level of species discrimination compared to 
amplicon sequencing. We applied 2bRAD-M to analyze the vaginal microbiota in a 
population with variations in cervical ripeness and to explore potential 
microbiota factors influencing cervical ripening.
METHODS: A total of 30 full-term primigravid women participated in this study, 
with 15 belonging to the low scoring group of cervical ripeness and 15 to the 
high scoring group. Clinical information was collected from the participants, 
and the vaginal microbiota and community structure of both groups were analyzed 
using 2bRAD-M sequencing. Microbiota diversity and differential analyses were 
conducted to explore potential factors influencing cervical ripening.
RESULTS: A total of 605 species were detected. There was no difference in 
vaginal microbiota diversity between the two groups, and the vaginal microbial 
composition was structurally similar. In the two groups, Lactobacillus crispatus 
and Lactobacillus iners were identified as the two pivotal species through 
random forest analysis. Concurrent, extensive and close connections between 
species within the two groups were observed in the correlation analysis, 
influencing the aforementioned two species. Pairwise comparisons showed that 
Sphingomonas (P = 0.0017) and three others were abundant in high scoring group, 
while Alloprevotella (P = 0.0014), Tannerella (P = 0.0033), Bacteroides 
(P = 0.0132), Malassezia (P = 0.0296), Catonella (P = 0.0353) and Pseudomonas 
(P = 0.0353) and so on showed higher abundance in low scoring group. Linear 
discriminant analysis effect size identified 29 discriminative feature taxa.
CONCLUSION: For the first time, vaginal microbiota was sequenced using 2bRAD-M. 
With a relatively simple structure, a more stable vaginal microbiota is 
associated with higher cervical ripeness, and certain microorganisms, such as 
Sphingomonas, may play a beneficial role in cervical ripening.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03612-x
PMCID: PMC11529209
PMID: 39487440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Affect Disord. 2024 Oct 30;371:22-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.10.086. Online
 ahead of print.

Edinburgh postpartum depression scores are associated with vaginal and gut 
microbiota in pregnancy.

Nel NH(1), Marafie A(2), Bassis CM(3), Sugino KY(4), Nzerem A(1), Knickmeyer 
RR(2), McKee KS(5), Comstock SS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University, 
204 Trout, 469 Wilson Rd, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States of America.
(2)College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University, United States of 
America.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, University 
of Michigan, United States of America.
(4)Harold Hamm Diabetes Center, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, United States of America.
(5)Department of Family Medicine, University of Michigan Medical School, United 
States of America.
(6)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, Michigan State University, 
204 Trout, 469 Wilson Rd, East Lansing, MI 48824, United States of America. 
Electronic address: comsto37@msu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal and postpartum depression may be influenced by the 
composition of host associated microbiomes. As such, the objective of this study 
was to elucidate the relationship between the human gut or vaginal microbiomes 
in pregnancy with prenatal or postpartum depression.
METHODS: 140 female participants were recruited at their first prenatal visit 
and completed the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) to screen for 
depression and anxiety, in addition the EPDS was completed one month postpartum. 
Vaginal and stool biospecimens were collected in the third trimester, analyzed 
using 16S rRNA gene sequencing, and assessed for alpha and beta diversity. 
Individual taxa differences and clustering using the k-medoids algorithm enabled 
community state type classification.
RESULTS: Participants with higher postpartum EPDS scores had higher species 
richness and lower abundance of L. crispatus in the vaginal microbiota compared 
to those with lower EPDS scores. Participants with a higher prenatal EPDS score 
had lower species richness of the gut microbiome. Participants with a vaginal 
community state type dominated by L. iners had the highest mean prenatal EPDS 
scores, whereas postpartum EPDS scores were similar regardless of prenatal 
vaginal state type.
LIMITATIONS: Our small sample size and participant's self-report bias limits 
generalizability of results.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression in the prenatal and postpartum period is associated with 
the composition and diversity of the gut and vaginal microbiomes in the third 
trimester of pregnancy. These results provide a foundational understanding of 
the microbial relationships between maternal health and depression for 
identifying potential therapeutic treatments.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.10.086
PMID: 39481687

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.

1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2024 Oct 29;230(Pt 2):116596. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2024.116596.  Online ahead of print.

Insights into the modulatory effects of host-gut microbial xanthine 
co-metabolism on high-fat diet-fed mice.

Chen WB(1), Hu GA(1), Dong BC(1), Sun HY(1), Lu DZ(1), Ru MY(1), Yu YL(1), Wang 
H(2), Wei B(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Science & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, Key Laboratory of Marine 
Fishery Resources Exploitment & Utilization of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China.
(2)College of Pharmaceutical Science & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, Key Laboratory of Marine 
Fishery Resources Exploitment & Utilization of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China; Binjiang Institute of 
Artificial Intelligence, ZJUT, Hangzhou 310056, China. Electronic address: 
hongw@zjut.edu.cn.
(3)College of Pharmaceutical Science & Collaborative Innovation Center of 
Yangtze River Delta Region Green Pharmaceuticals, Key Laboratory of Marine 
Fishery Resources Exploitment & Utilization of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang 
University of Technology, Hangzhou 310014, China; Binjiang Institute of 
Artificial Intelligence, ZJUT, Hangzhou 310056, China. Electronic address: 
binwei@zjut.edu.cn.

Gut microbiota-mediated endobiotic and xenobiotic metabolism play crucial roles 
in disease progression, and drug therapy/toxicity. Our recent study suggested 
that gut microbiota-mediated xanthine metabolism is correlated with resistance 
to high-fat diet (HFD)-induced obesity. Here, we explored the role of host-gut 
microbial xanthine co-metabolism in the prevention and treatment of HFD-induced 
obesity by orally administration of Bifidobacterium longum, xanthine, and a 
xanthine oxidase inhibitor (topiroxostat). The findings indicate that xanthine 
exhibits a significantly protective effect against HFD-induced obesity. While B. 
longum, xanthine, and topiroxostat did not alleviate the dysbiosis of the weight 
and glucose metabolism of HFD-induced obesity (DIO) and obesity resistance (DIR) 
mice. 16S rRNA sequencing analyses revealed that treatments with B. longum 
significantly altered gut microbiota composition in HFD-fed and DIO mice. 
Microbial interaction network analysis revealed several Bacteroidetes species, 
such as Amulumruptor caecigallinarius and Muribaculum intestinale, as keystone 
taxa that were notably enriched by B. longum. Untargeted metabolomics analysis 
implied that xanthine might serve as a crucial molecule in regulating body 
weight, exerting a preventive effect on HFD-induced obesity. This study offers 
new perspectives on the influence of host-gut microbial xanthine co-metabolism 
on HFD-fed mice and emphasizes the promising role of xanthine in promoting 
weight loss.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2024.116596
PMID: 39481656

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 30;14(1):26092. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-77260-6.

Stage dependent microbial dynamics in hepatocellular carcinoma and adjacent 
normal liver tissues.

Jo HE(1)(2), Khom S(3), Lee S(3), Cho SH(3), Park SY(3), You GR(4), Kim H(5), 
Kim NI(6), Jeong JH(7), Yoon JH(8), Yun M(9).

Author information:
(1)Technology Innovation Research Division, World Institute of Kimchi, Gwangju, 
61755, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Microbiology, Chonnam 
National University Medical School, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Chonnam National University 
Hospital and Medical School, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hwasun Chonnam National 
University Hospital and Medical School, Jeonnam, 58128, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Surgery, Chonnam National University Hospital and Medical 
School, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea.
(6)Deparment of Pathology, Chonnam National University Hospital and Medical 
School, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Department of Microbiology, Chonnam 
National University Medical School, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea. 
jeongjaeho@chonnam.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Chonnam National University 
Hospital and Medical School, Gwangju, 61469, Republic of Korea. 
zenmake14@gmail.com.
(9)Technology Innovation Research Division, World Institute of Kimchi, Gwangju, 
61755, Republic of Korea. misun.yun@wikim.re.kr.

The interactive pathway of the gut-liver axis underscores the significance of 
microbiome modulation in the pathogenesis and progression of various liver 
diseases, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). This study aims to 
investigate the disparities in the composition and functionality of the hepatic 
microbiota between tumor tissues and adjacent normal liver tissues, and their 
implications in the etiology of HCC. We conducted a comparative analysis of the 
hepatic microbiome between adjacent normal liver tissues and tumor tissues from 
HCC patients. Samples were categorized according to the modified Union for 
International Cancer Control (mUICC) staging system into Non-tumor, mUICC stage 
I, mUICC stage II, and mUICC stage III groups. Microbial richness and community 
composition were analyzed, and phylogenetic profiles were examined to identify 
significantly altered microbial taxa among the groups. Predicted metabolic 
pathways were analyzed using PICRUSt2. Our analysis did not reveal significant 
differences in microbial richness and community composition with the development 
of HCC. However, phylogenetic profiling identified significantly altered 
microbial taxa among the groups. Sphingobium, known for degrading 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), exhibited a significantly negative correlation 
with clinical indices in HCC patients. Conversely, Sphingomonas, a gut bacterium 
associated with various liver diseases, showed a positive correlation. Predicted 
metabolic pathways suggested a correlation between atrazine degradation and 
valine, leucine, and isoleucine biosynthesis with mUICC stage and tumor size. 
Our results underscore the critical link between hepatic microbial composition 
and function and the HCC tumor stage, suggesting a potentially pivotal role in 
the development of HCC. These findings highlight the importance of targeting the 
hepatic microbiome for therapeutic strategies in HCC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-77260-6
PMCID: PMC11525880
PMID: 39478014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Front Microbiol. 2024 Oct 15;15:1456087. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1456087. 
eCollection 2024.

Associations between maternal microbiome, metabolome and incidence of low-birth 
weight in Guatemalan participants from the Women First Trial.

Ruebel ML(1)(2), Gilley SP(3), Yeruva L(1)(2), Tang M(3), Frank DN(4), Garcés 
A(5), Figueroa L(5), Lan RS(2)(6), Assress HA(2)(6), Kemp JF(3), Westcott 
JLE(3), Hambidge KM(3), Shankar K(3), Krebs NF(3).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome and Metabolism Research Unit, USDA-ARS, Southeast Area USDA-ARS, 
Little Rock, AR, United States.
(2)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Nutrition, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Disease, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(5)Maternal Infant Health Center, Instituto de Nutrición de Centro América y 
Panamá (INCAP), Guatemala City, Guatemala.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Developmental Nutrition, University of 
Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.

BACKGROUND: Low birth weight (LBW; <2,500 g) affects approximately 15 to 20 
percent of global births annually and is associated with suboptimal child 
development. Recent studies suggest a link between the maternal gut microbiome 
and poor obstetric and perinatal outcomes. The goal of this study was to examine 
relationships between maternal microbial taxa, fecal metabolites, and maternal 
anthropometry on incidence of LBW in resource-limited settings.
METHODS: This was a secondary analysis of the Women First trial conducted in a 
semi-rural region of Guatemala. Maternal weight was measured at 12 and 34 weeks 
(wk) of gestation. Infant anthropometry measures were collected within 48 h of 
delivery. Maternal fecal samples at 12 and 34 weeks were used for microbiome 
(16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing) and metabolomics analysis (34 wk). Linear 
mixed models using the MaAslin2 package were utilized to assess changes in 
microbiome associated with LBW. Predictive models using gradient boosted 
machines (XGBoost) were developed using the H2o.ai engine.
RESULTS: No differences in β-diversity were observed at either time point 
between mothers with LBW infants relative to normal weight (NW) infants. Simpson 
diversity at 12 and 34 weeks was lower in mothers with LBW infants. Notable 
differences in genus-level abundance between LBW and NW mothers (p < 0.05) were 
observed at 12 weeks with increasing abundances of Barnesiella, 
Faecalibacterium, Sutterella, and Bacterioides. At 34 weeks, there were lower 
abundances of Magasphaera, Phascolarctobacterium, and Turicibacter and higher 
abundances of Bacteriodes, and Fusobacterium in mothers with LBW infants. Fecal 
metabolites related to bile acids, tryptophan metabolism and fatty acid related 
metabolites changed in mothers with LBW infants. Classification models to 
predict LBW based on maternal anthropometry and predicted microbial functions 
showed moderate performance.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, the findings indicate that alterations in the maternal 
microbiome and metabolome were associated with LBW. Future research should 
target functional and predictive roles of the maternal gut microbiome in infant 
birth outcomes including birthweight.

Copyright © 2024 Ruebel, Gilley, Yeruva, Tang, Frank, Garcés, Figueroa, Lan, 
Assress, Kemp, Westcott, Hambidge, Shankar and Krebs.

DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2024.1456087
PMCID: PMC11518777
PMID: 39473842

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. NPJ Genom Med. 2024 Oct 29;9(1):52. doi: 10.1038/s41525-024-00440-w.

Gut microbial and human genetic signatures of inflammatory bowel disease 
increase risk of comorbid mental disorders.

Lee J(#)(1)(2), Oh SJ(#)(3), Ha E(1)(2), Shin GY(3), Kim HJ(3), Kim K(4)(5), Lee 
CK(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(4)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
kkim@khu.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. kkim@khu.ac.kr.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. changkyun.lee@khu.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

The high prevalence of comorbid mental disorders (CMDs) in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is well-documented. This study delves into the 
intricate CMD-IBD relationship through comprehensive analyses using human 
variants, gut microbiome, and anxiety/depression estimates from a cohort of 507 
IBD patients and 75 controls. Notably, patients with IBD, especially those with 
CMD, exhibited lower diversity than controls. We identified 106 differentially 
abundant taxa (DATs) in IBD patients compared to controls and 21 DATs 
distinguishing CMD-affected from CMD-free IBD patients. Microbial IBD-risk 
scores, reflecting an individual's microbial burden for IBD, revealed a 
significant enrichment of IBD-risk signatures in CMD-affected patients compared 
to CMD-free patients. Additionally, there was an IBD-risk variant potentially 
regulating the abundance of an IBD/CMD-associated DAT, suggesting an interplay 
between IBD-risk variants and dysbiosis in CMD. Our investigation underscores 
the pivotal role of IBD-associated gut dysbiosis in predisposing IBD patients to 
CMD, partially through genetic variant-mediated mechanisms.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41525-024-00440-w
PMCID: PMC11522461
PMID: 39472439

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 Oct 14;14:1443654. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2024.1443654. eCollection 2024.

The influence of perilipin 5 deficiency on gut microbiome profiles in murine 
metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) and 
MAFLD-hepatocellular carcinoma.

Krizanac M(#)(1), Štancl P(#)(2), Mass-Sanchez PB(1), Karlić R(2), Moeckel D(3), 
Lammers T(3), Asimakopoulos A(1), Weiskirchen R(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pathobiochemistry, Experimental Gene Therapy and 
Clinical Chemistry (IFMPEGKC), RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics Group, Division of Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, 
Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(3)Institute for Experimental Molecular Imaging, RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Metabolic dysfunction-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) has 
emerged as the leading cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) worldwide. Over 
the years, Perilipin 5 (PLIN5) has been recognized as a key regulator of both 
MAFLD and HCC development. In our previous studies we demonstrated that 
deficiency in Plin5 reduces the severity of MAFLD and HCC in mice. 
Interestingly, it has been established that patients with MAFLD and HCC exhibit 
various changes in their gut microbiome profiles. The gut microbiome itself has 
been shown to play a role in modulating carcinogenesis and the immune response 
against cancer.
METHODS: Therefore, we conducted a study to investigate the alterations in fecal 
microbiome composition in wild type (WT) and Plin5-deficient (Plin5 -/-) mice 
models of MAFLD and MAFLD-induced HCC (MAFLD-HCC). We utilized 16S rRNA gene 
sequencing analysis to profile the composition of gut bacteria in fecal samples.
RESULTS: Notably, we discovered that the absence of Plin5 alone is already 
associated with changes in gut microbiota composition. Moreover, feeding the 
mice a Western diet (WD) resulted in additional microbial alterations. 
Interestingly, Plin5 -/- animals exhibited an enrichment of the beneficial taxa 
Lactobacillus in both animal models.
DISCUSSION: Our findings identify Plin5 as a major regulator of gut microbiota 
during the development of MAFLD and MAFLD-HCC.

Copyright © 2024 Krizanac, Štancl, Mass-Sanchez, Karlić, Moeckel, Lammers, 
Asimakopoulos and Weiskirchen.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2024.1443654
PMCID: PMC11513398
PMID: 39469452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.

1. Gut Microbes. 2024 Jan-Dec;16(1):2418984. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2418984. 
Epub 2024 Oct 28.

Fecal microbial marker panel for aiding diagnosis of autism spectrum disorders.

Wan Y(1)(2)(3), Wong OWH(3)(4), Tun HM(1)(5)(6), Su Q(1)(2), Xu Z(1)(2), Tang 
W(1), Ma SL(3)(4), Chan S(3)(4), Chan FKL(1)(3)(7), Ng SC(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota I-Center (MagIC), Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)The D. H. Chen Foundation Hub of Advanced Technology for Child Health 
(HATCH), The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 
China.
(5)Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Digestive 
Disease, Institute of Digestive Disease, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(6)The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(7)Centre for Gut Microbiota Research, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong 
Kong SAR, China.

Accumulating evidence suggests that gut microbiota alterations influence brain 
function and could serve as diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets. The 
potential of using fecal microbiota signatures to aid autism spectrum disorder 
(ASD) detection is still not fully explored. Here, we assessed the potential of 
different levels of microbial markers (taxonomy and genome) in distinguishing 
children with ASD from age and gender-matched typically developing peers 
(n = 598, ASD vs TD = 273 vs 325). A combined microbial taxa and 
metagenome-assembled genome (MAG) markers showed a better performance than 
either microbial taxa or microbial MAGs alone for detecting ASD. A 
machine-learning model comprising 5 bacterial taxa and 44 microbial MAG markers 
(2 viral MAGs and 42 bacterial MAGs) achieved an area under the receiving 
operator curve (AUROC) of 0.886 in the discovery cohort and 0.734 in an 
independent validation cohort. Furthermore, the identified biomarkers and 
predicted ASD risk score also significantly correlated with the core symptoms 
measured by the Social Responsiveness Scale-2 (SRS-2). The microbiome panel 
showed a superior classification performance in younger children (≤6 years old) 
with an AUROC of 0.845 than older children (>6 years). The model was broadly 
applicable to subjects across genders, with or without gastrointestinal tract 
symptoms (constipation and diarrhea) and with or without psychiatric 
comorbidities (attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and anxiety). This 
study highlights the potential clinical validity of fecal microbiome to aid in 
ASD diagnosis and will facilitate studies to understand the association of 
disturbance of human gut microbiota and ASD symptom severity.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2024.2418984
PMCID: PMC11540074
PMID: 39468837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FKLC is Board Member of CUHK Medical Centre. He 
is a co-founder, non-executive Board Chairman, non-executive scientific advisor, 
Honorary Chief Medical Officer and shareholder of GenieBiome Ltd. He receives 
patent royalties through his affiliated institutions. He has received fees as an 
advisor and honoraria as a speaker for Eisai Co. Ltd., AstraZeneca, Pfizer Inc., 
Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., and Takeda (China) Holdings Co. Ltd. SCN has served 
as an advisory board member for Pfizer, Ferring, Janssen, and Abbvie and 
received honoraria as a speaker for Ferring, Tillotts, Menarini, Janssen, 
Abbvie, and Takeda. SCN has received research grants through her affiliated 
institutions from Olympus, Ferring, and Abbvie. SCN is a founder member, 
non-executive director, non-executive scientific advisor, and shareholder of 
GenieBiome Ltd. SCN receives patent royalties through her affiliated 
institutions. QS and ZX are Scientists (Diagnostics) of GenieBiome Ltd. WT is a 
Consultant (Regulatory Affairs) of GenieBiome Ltd. YW, QS, WT, FKLC, and SCN are 
named inventors of patent applications held by the CUHK and MagIC that cover the 
therapeutic and diagnostic use of microbiome related to ASD.

1. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol. 2024 Oct 28;108(1):497. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-024-13316-x.

Gut microbiota predict retinopathy in patients with diabetes: A longitudinal 
cohort study.

Qin X(#)(1), Sun J(#)(1), Chen S(1), Xu Y(2), Lu L(2), Lu M(3), Li J(3), Ma 
Y(4), Lou F(5), Zou H(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Shanghai Eye Disease Prevention and Treatment Center/Shanghai Eye Hospital, 
Shanghai, China.
(3)Community Health Service Center of Jiangsu Road Subdistrict, Changning 
District, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. myy_29@163.com.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. veralou@vip.163.com.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai General Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. 
zouhaidong@sjtu.edu.cn.
(7)Shanghai Eye Disease Prevention and Treatment Center/Shanghai Eye Hospital, 
Shanghai, China. zouhaidong@sjtu.edu.cn.
(8)Shanghai Engineering Center for Precise Diagnosis and Treatment of Eye 
Diseases, Shanghai, China. zouhaidong@sjtu.edu.cn.
(9)National Clinical Research Center for Eye Diseases, Shanghai, China. 
zouhaidong@sjtu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The gut microbiota has emerged as an independent risk factor for diabetes and 
its complications. This research aimed to delve into the intricate relationship 
between the gut microbiome and diabetic retinopathy (DR) through a dual approach 
of cross-sectional and prospective cohort studies. In our cross-sectional study 
cross-sectional investigation involving ninety-nine individuals with diabetes, 
distinct microbial signatures associated with DR were identified. Specifically, 
gut microbiome profiling revealed decreased levels of Butyricicoccus and 
Ruminococcus torques group, alongside upregulated methanogenesis pathways among 
DR patients. These individuals concurrently exhibited lower concentrations of 
short-chain fatty acids in their plasma. Leveraging machine learning models, 
including random forest classifiers, we constructed a panel of microbial genera 
and genes that robustly differentiated DR cases. Importantly, these genera also 
demonstrated significant correlations with dietary patterns and the molecular 
profiles of peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Building upon these findings, 
our prospective cohort study followed 62 diabetes patients over a 2-year period 
to assess the predictive value of these microbial markers. The results 
underlined the panel's efficacy in predicting DR incidence. By stratifying 
patients based on the predictive genera and metabolites identified in the 
cross-sectional phase, we established significant associations between reduced 
levels of Butyricicoccus, plasma acetate, and increased susceptibility to DR. 
This investigation not only deepens our understanding of how gut microbiota 
influences DR but also underscores the potential of microbial markers as early 
indicators of disease risk. These insights hold promise for developing targeted 
interventions aimed at mitigating the impact of diabetic complications. KEY 
POINTS: • Microbial signatures are differed in diabetic patients with and 
without retinopathy • DR-related taxa are linked to dietary habits and 
transcriptomic profiles • Lower abundances of Butyricicoccus and acetate were 
prospectively associated with DR.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00253-024-13316-x
PMCID: PMC11519154
PMID: 39466432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 26;14(1):25550. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-77273-1.

Genetic evidence of bidirectional mendelian randomization study on the causality 
between gut microbiome and respiratory diseases contributes to gut-lung axis.

Zhou X(#)(1), Shen S(#)(2), Wang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)The First Clinical College of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 548 
Binwen, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310053, China.
(2)The Second Clinical College of Zhejiang, Chinese Medical University, 548 
Binwen, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310053, China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 54 
Youdian, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, 310003, China. wangzhen610@sina.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Observational studies and clinical trials have suggested the relationship 
between the gut microbiome and respiratory diseases, but the causality between 
them remains unclear. Firstly, we selected eight respiratory diseases 
Genome-wide association study (GWAS) datasets mainly from the FinnGen 
collaboration as outcomes. The exposure was based on GWAS statistics about the 
gut microbiome, sourced from the MiBioGen consortium, including gut microbial 
taxa. The causal link between the gut microbiome and respiratory illnesses was 
then estimated using a Two-sample Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis, 
including the inverse-variance weighted (IVW), weighted median, MR-Egger, simple 
mode, and weighted mode. To ensure reliability, F-statistics and sensitivity 
tests were conducted. Furthermore, we performed a reverse MR analysis of the 
pre-Mendelian positive findings to possible reverse causality. For the 196 gut 
microbe taxa, the IVW analysis suggested 88 potential associations with eight 
clinically prevalent respiratory diseases. Among them, 30 causal associations 
were found in more than one MR method. Multiple statistical corrections have 
confirmed three causal associations: genus Holdemanella was a risk factor for 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (P = 1.3 × 10-4, OR = 1.18), family 
FamilyXIII was a protective factor for COPD (P = 1.3 × 10-3, OR = 0.75), and 
genus Oxalobacter was a risk factor for asthma (P = 2.1 × 10-4, OR = 1.09). Our 
MR analysis results indicate that there would be a causal relationship between 
the gut microbiome and respiratory diseases, contributing to the gut-lung axis. 
This finding offers new insights into the gut microbiome's roles in respiratory 
diseases' clinical prevention, pathogenesis, and improvement of clinical 
symptoms. Further randomized controlled trials are necessary to clarify the 
protective effect of probiotics and fecal microbial transplantation on 
respiratory health.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-77273-1
PMCID: PMC11513010
PMID: 39462039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. NPJ Parkinsons Dis. 2024 Oct 26;10(1):203. doi: 10.1038/s41531-024-00802-2.

Microbial biomarker discovery in Parkinson's disease through a network-based 
approach.

Zhao Z(1)(2), Chen J(3), Zhao D(3), Chen B(3), Wang Q(3), Li Y(3), Chen J(3), 
Bai C(3), Guo X(3), Hu N(3)(4), Zhang B(3)(4), Zhao R(5)(6), Yuan J(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Peking University Third Hospital, 100191, Beijing, 
China.
(2)Institute for Drug Evaluation, Peking University Health Science Center, 
100191, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Peking University Sixth Hospital, Peking University 
Institute of Mental Health, NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health (Peking 
University), National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking 
University Sixth Hospital), Peking University, 100191, Beijing, China.
(4)First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, No. 222, Zhongshan 
Road, Dalian, 116011, Liaoning, China.
(5)Department of Pharmacy, Peking University Third Hospital, 100191, Beijing, 
China. zhaorongsheng@bjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Institute for Drug Evaluation, Peking University Health Science Center, 
100191, Beijing, China. zhaorongsheng@bjmu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Neurology, Peking University Sixth Hospital, Peking University 
Institute of Mental Health, NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health (Peking 
University), National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking 
University Sixth Hospital), Peking University, 100191, Beijing, China. 
junliangyuan@bjmu.edu.cn.

Associations between the gut microbiota and Parkinson's disease (PD) have been 
widely investigated. However, the replicable biomarkers for PD diagnosis across 
multiple populations remain elusive. Herein, we performed a meta-analysis to 
investigate the pivotal role of the gut microbiome in PD and its potential 
diagnostic implications. Six 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequence datasets from five 
independent studies were integrated, encompassing 550 PD and 456 healthy control 
samples. The analysis revealed significant alterations in microbial composition 
and alpha and beta diversity, emphasizing altered gut microbiota in PD. Specific 
microbial taxa, including Faecalibacterium, Roseburia, and Coprococcus_2, known 
as butyrate producers, were notably diminished in PD, potentially contributing 
to intestinal inflammation. Conversely, genera such as Akkermansia and Bilophila 
exhibited increased relative abundances. A network-based algorithm called 
NetMoss was utilized to identify potential biomarkers of PD. Afterwards, a 
classification model incorporating 11 optimized genera demonstrated high 
performance. Further functional analyses indicated enrichment in pathways 
related to neurodegeneration and metabolic pathways. These findings illuminate 
the intricate relationship between the gut microbiota and PD, offering insights 
into potential therapeutic interventions and personalized diagnostic strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41531-024-00802-2
PMCID: PMC11513973
PMID: 39461950

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2024 Oct 26:gkae952. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkae952. Online ahead
 of print.

PIPdb: a comprehensive plasmid sequence resource for tracking the horizontal 
transfer of pathogenic factors and antimicrobial resistance genes.

Zhu Q(1)(2), Chen Q(1)(3), Gao S(1)(2), Li Z(4), Zhou H(4), Cui Z(4), Fan G(1), 
Liu X(4), Wu X(4), Ma J(1)(2)(3), Kan B(4), Hu S(1)(2), Wu L(1)(2)(3), Lu X(4).

Author information:
(1)Microbial Resource and Big Data Center, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Microbial Resources, Institute of Microbiology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.
(3)Chinese National Microbiology Data Center (NMDC), Beijing 100101, China.
(4)National Key Laboratory of Intelligent Tracking and Forecasting for 
Infectious Diseases, National Institute for Communicable Disease Control and 
Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing 102206, 
China.

Plasmids, as independent genetic elements, carrying resistance or virulence 
genes and transfer them among different pathogens, posing a significant threat 
to human health. Under the 'One Health' approach, it is crucial to control the 
spread of plasmids carrying such genes. To achieve this, a comprehensive 
characterization of plasmids in pathogens is essential. Here we present the 
Plasmids in Pathogens Database (PIPdb), a pioneering resource that includes 
792 964 plasmid segment clusters (PSCs) derived from 1 009 571 assembled genomes 
across 450 pathogenic species from 110 genera. To our knowledge, PIPdb is the 
first database specifically dedicated to plasmids in pathogenic bacteria, 
offering detailed multi-dimensional metadata such as collection date, 
geographical origin, ecosystem, host taxonomy, and habitat. PIPdb also provides 
extensive functional annotations, including plasmid type, insertion sequences, 
integron, oriT, relaxase, T4CP, virulence factors genes, heavy metal resistance 
genes and antibiotic resistance genes. The database features a user-friendly 
interface that facilitates studies on plasmids across diverse host taxa, 
habitats, and ecosystems, with a focus on those carrying antimicrobial 
resistance genes (ARGs). We have integrated online tools for plasmid 
identification and annotation from assembled genomes. Additionally, PIPdb 
includes a risk-scoring system for identifying potentially high-risk plasmids. 
The PIPdb web interface is accessible at https://nmdc.cn/pipdb.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic 
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkae952
PMID: 39460620

1. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2024 Oct 6;17(10):1334. doi: 10.3390/ph17101334.

The Potential Role of Boron in the Modulation of Gut Microbiota Composition: An 
In Vivo Pilot Study.

Sentürk NB(1), Kasapoglu B(1)(2), Sahin E(3), Ozcan O(4), Ozansoy M(5), Ozansoy 
MB(6), Siyah P(7), Sezerman U(3)(8), Sahin F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering, Yeditepe 
University, 34755 Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Abdi Ibrahim Pharmaceuticals, Biotechnological Products Production Facility 
(AbdiBio), 34538 Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics PhD Program, Institute of Health Sciences, 
Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, 34752 Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Cryptomicrobiology, 41400 Kocaeli, Turkey.
(5)Department of Physiology, International School of Medicine, Istanbul Medipol 
University, 34810 Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Physical Therapy and Rehabilitation, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, Fenerbahçe University, 34758 Istanbul, Turkey.
(7)Department of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Bahçeşehir University, 34353 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Acibadem Mehmet Ali Aydinlar University, 34752 Istanbul, Turkey.

Background/Objectives: The role of the gut microbiome in the development and 
progression of many diseases has received increased attention in recent years. 
Boron, a trace mineral found in dietary sources, has attracted interest due to 
its unique electron depletion and coordination characteristics in chemistry, as 
well as its potential role in modulating the gut microbiota. This study 
investigates the effects of inorganic boron derivatives on the gut microbiota of 
mice. Methods: For three weeks, boric acid (BA), sodium pentaborate pentahydrate 
(NaB), and sodium perborate tetrahydrate (SPT) were dissolved (200 mg/kg each) 
in drinking water and administered to wild-type BALB/c mice. The composition of 
the gut microbiota was analyzed to determine the impact of these treatments. 
Results: The administration of BA significantly altered the composition of the 
gut microbiota, resulting in a rise in advantageous species such as Barnesiella 
and Alistipes. Additionally, there was a decrease in some taxa associated with 
inflammation and illness, such as Clostridium XIVb and Bilophila. Notable 
increases in genera like Treponema and Catellicoccus were observed, suggesting 
the potential of boron compounds to enrich microbial communities with unique 
metabolic functions. Conclusions: These findings indicate that boron compounds 
may have the potential to influence gut microbiota composition positively, 
offering potential prebiotic effects. Further research with additional analyses 
is necessary to fully understand the interaction between boron and microbiota 
and to explore the possibility of their use as prebiotic agents in clinical 
settings.

DOI: 10.3390/ph17101334
PMCID: PMC11510266
PMID: 39458975

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest 
regarding this study. Author Orhan Ozcan was employed by the company 
Cryptomicrobiology, and author Burcu Kasapoglu was employed by the company Abdi 
Ibrahim Pharmaceuticals. The remaining authors declare that the re-search was 
con-ducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that 
could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Microorganisms. 2024 Sep 30;12(10):1977. doi: 10.3390/microorganisms12101977.

Bifidogenic Effect of Human Milk Oligosaccharides on Pediatric IBD Fecal 
Microbiota.

Otaru N(1), Bajic D(1), Van den Abbeele P(2), Vande Velde S(3), Van Biervliet 
S(3), Steinert RE(1), Rehman A(1).

Author information:
(1)Health, Nutrition & Care (HNC), DSM-Firmenich, 4303 Kaiseraugst, Switzerland.
(2)Cryptobiotix SA, Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 82, 9052 Ghent, Belgium.
(3)Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Ghent University Hospital, Corneel 
Heymanslaan 10, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

The prevalence of pediatric inflammatory bowel disease (pIBD) has been 
increasing over the last two decades. Yet, treatment strategies are still 
limited, in part due to the multifactorial nature of the disease and the complex 
interplay between genetic, environmental, dietary, immune, and gut microbial 
factors in its etiology. With their direct and indirect anti-inflammatory 
properties, human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) are a promising treatment and 
management strategy for IBD. However, to date there are no insights into how 
HMOs may affect pIBD microbiota. Here, we compared the effects of 
2'fucosyllactose (2'FL), difucosyllactose (DFL), 3'sialyllactose (3'SL), and 
blends thereof with fructooligosaccharide (FOS) on microbiota functionality 
(short- and branched-chain fatty acids, pH, and gas production) and composition 
(quantitative shallow shotgun sequencing) using fecal material from eight 
different pediatric Crohn's disease patients inoculated in the SIFR® technology. 
In general, all HMO treatments significantly increased total short-chain fatty 
acid production when compared with FOS, despite equal gas production. We found 
that 2'FL, either alone or in combination with DFL and 3'SL, exhibited a strong 
acetogenic and propiogenic effect, and 3'SL an acetogenic effect that surpassed 
the effects observed with FOS. No differences in overall community diversity 
between HMO- and FOS-treated pIBD microbiota were observed. There was, however, 
a stronger bifidogenic effect of 2'FL, 3'SL, 2'FL/DFL, and 2'FL/DFL + 3'SL when 
compared with FOS. In general, 3'SL and HMO blends enriched a broader species 
profile, including taxa with potentially anti-inflammatory properties, such as 
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii and Blautia species. This study suggests HMOs as a 
promising strategy to beneficially alter the gut microbial profile in pIBD.

DOI: 10.3390/microorganisms12101977
PMCID: PMC11509818
PMID: 39458287

Conflict of interest statement: N.O., D.B., R.E.S., and A.R. are employees of 
DSM-Firmenich. While the authors participated in the design of the study, the 
interpretation of the data, and the writing of the manuscript, they did not 
participate in the collection and analysis of data. P.V.d.A. is an employee of 
Cryptobiotix that received funding from DSM-Firmenich to perform this research.

1. Animals (Basel). 2024 Oct 16;14(20):2979. doi: 10.3390/ani14202979.

Stability of Gastric Fluid and Fecal Microbial Populations in Healthy Horses 
under Pasture and Stable Conditions.

Bishop RC(1), Kemper AM(1), Clark LV(2), Wilkins PA(1), McCoy AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, University of Illinois 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, USA.
(2)High-Performance Computing in Biology, Roy J. Carver Biotechnology Center, 
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

Equine gastrointestinal microbial communities vary across the gastrointestinal 
tract and in response to diet or disease. Understanding the composition and 
stability of gastric fluid microbiota in healthy horses is a prerequisite to 
understanding changes associated with the development of disease. The objective 
of this study was to describe microbial communities in the gastric fluid and 
feces of healthy horses longitudinally. Horses were maintained on pasture (6 
weeks), stabled (5 weeks), then returned to pasture. A consistent forage diet 
was provided throughout. Native gastric fluid and feces were collected weekly 
for full-length 16S ribosomal DNA sequencing and microbial profiling analysis. 
Fewer taxa were identified in the gastric fluid (770) than in the feces (5284). 
Species richness and diversity were significantly different between sample types 
(p < 0.001), but not between housing locations (p = 0.3). There was a 
significant effect of housing and horse on the Bray-Curtis compositional 
diversity of gastric (p = 0.005; p = 0.009) and fecal (p = 0.001; p = 0.001) 
microbiota. When horses moved from pasture to stable, the relative proportions 
of gastric fluid Lactobacillaceae increased and Streptococcaceae decreased, 
while fecal Firmicutes increased and Bacteriodota decreased. Within each housing 
condition, there was no significant week-to-week variation in gastric (p = 0.9) 
or fecal (p = 0.09) microbiota. Overall, these findings support the maintenance 
of stable gastric and fecal microbial populations under each management 
condition, providing a basis for further investigation of gastric fluid 
microbiota in diseases of the foregut.

DOI: 10.3390/ani14202979
PMCID: PMC11503871
PMID: 39457909

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 19;25(20):11272. doi: 10.3390/ijms252011272.

Novelties on Neuroinflammation in Alzheimer's Disease-Focus on Gut and Oral 
Microbiota Involvement.

Popescu C(1)(2), Munteanu C(2)(3), Anghelescu A(1)(2), Ciobanu V(4), Spînu 
A(1)(2), Andone I(1)(2), Mandu M(1)(2), Bistriceanu R(1)(2), Băilă M(1)(2), 
Postoiu RL(1)(2), Vlădulescu-Trandafir AI(1)(2), Giuvara S(1)(2), Malaelea 
AD(1)(2), Onose G(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Carol Davila", 
020022 Bucharest, Romania.
(2)Neuromuscular Rehabilitation Clinic Division, Clinical Emergency Hospital 
"Bagdasar-Arseni", 041915 Bucharest, Romania.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medical Bioengineering, 
University of Medicine and Pharmacy "Grigore T. Popa" Iași, 700454 Iași, 
Romania.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Faculty for Automatic Control 
and Computers, University Politehnica of Bucharest, 060042 Bucharest, Romania.

Recent studies underscore the role of gut and oral microbiota in influencing 
neuroinflammation through the microbiota-gut-brain axis, including in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). This review aims to provide a comprehensive synthesis 
of recent findings on the involvement of gut and oral microbiota in the 
neuroinflammatory processes associated with AD, emphasizing novel insights and 
therapeutic implications. This review reveals that dysbiosis in AD patients' gut 
and oral microbiota is linked to heightened peripheral and central inflammatory 
responses. Specific bacterial taxa, such as Bacteroides and Firmicutes in the 
gut, as well as Porphyromonas gingivalis in the oral cavity, are notably altered 
in AD, leading to significant changes in microglial activation and cytokine 
production. Gut microbiota alterations are associated with increased intestinal 
permeability, facilitating the translocation of endotoxins like 
lipopolysaccharides (LPS) into the bloodstream and exacerbating 
neuroinflammation by activating the brain's toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) 
pathways. Furthermore, microbiota-derived metabolites, including short-chain 
fatty acids (SCFAs) and amyloid peptides, can cross the blood-brain barrier and 
modulate neuroinflammatory responses. While microbial amyloids may contribute to 
amyloid-beta aggregation in the brain, certain SCFAs like butyrate exhibit 
anti-inflammatory properties, suggesting a potential therapeutic avenue to 
mitigate neuroinflammation. This review not only highlights the critical role of 
microbiota in AD pathology but also offers a ray of hope by suggesting that 
modulating gut and oral microbiota could represent a novel therapeutic strategy 
for reducing neuroinflammation and slowing disease progression.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252011272
PMCID: PMC11508522
PMID: 39457054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

1. BMC Microbiol. 2024 Oct 26;24(1):434. doi: 10.1186/s12866-024-03593-x.

Nested patterns of commensals and endosymbionts in microbial communities of 
mosquito vectors.

Aželytė J(1), Maitre A(2)(3)(4), Abuin-Denis L(2)(5), Wu-Chuang A(2), Žiegytė 
R(1), Mateos-Hernandez L(2), Obregon D(6), Palinauskas V(7), Cabezas-Cruz A(8).

Author information:
(1)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius, LT-08412, Lithuania.
(2)Laboratoire de Santé Animale, ANSES, INRAE, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire 
d'Alfort, UMR BIPAR, Maisons-Alfort, F-94700, France.
(3)Laboratoire de Recherches Sur Le Développement de L'Elevage (SELMET-LRDE), 
INRAE, UR 0045, Corte, 20250, France.
(4)Laboratoire de Virologie, Université de Corse, EA 7310, Corte, France.
(5)Animal Biotechnology Department, Center for Genetic Engineering and 
Biotechnology, Avenue 31 between 158 and 190, P.O. Box 6162, Havana, 10600, 
Cuba.
(6)School of Environmental Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, N1G 2W1, 
Canada.
(7)Nature Research Centre, Akademijos 2, Vilnius, LT-08412, Lithuania. 
palinauskas@gmail.com.
(8)Laboratoire de Santé Animale, ANSES, INRAE, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire 
d'Alfort, UMR BIPAR, Maisons-Alfort, F-94700, France. 
alejandro.cabezas@vet-alfort.fr.

BACKGROUND: Mosquitoes serve as vectors for numerous pathogens, posing 
significant health risks to humans and animals. Understanding the complex 
interactions within mosquito microbiota is crucial for deciphering 
vector-pathogen dynamics and developing effective disease management strategies. 
Here, we investigated the nested patterns of Wolbachia endosymbionts and 
Escherichia-Shigella within the microbiota of laboratory-reared Culex pipiens f. 
molestus and Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes. We hypothesized that Wolbachia 
would exhibit a structured pattern reflective of its co-evolved relationship 
with both mosquito species, while Escherichia-Shigella would display a more 
dynamic pattern influenced by environmental factors.
RESULTS: Our analysis revealed different microbial compositions between the two 
mosquito species, although some microorganisms were common to both. Network 
analysis revealed distinct community structures and interaction patterns for 
these bacteria in the microbiota of each mosquito species. Escherichia-Shigella 
appeared prominently within major network modules in both mosquito species, 
particularly in module P4 of Cx. pipiens f. molestus, interacting with 93 nodes, 
and in module Q3 of Cx. quinquefasciatus, interacting with 161 nodes, sharing 55 
nodes across both species. On the other hand, Wolbachia appeared in disparate 
modules: module P3 in Cx. pipiens f. molestus and a distinct module with a 
single additional taxon in Cx. quinquefasciatus, showing species-specific 
interactions and no shared taxa. Through computer simulations, we evaluated how 
the removal of Wolbachia or Escherichia-Shigella affects network robustness. In 
Cx. pipiens f. molestus, removal of Wolbachia led to a decrease in network 
connectivity, while Escherichia-Shigella removal had a minimal impact. 
Conversely, in Cx. quinquefasciatus, removal of Escherichia-Shigella resulted in 
decreased network stability, whereas Wolbachia removal had minimal effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Contrary to our hypothesis, the findings indicate that Wolbachia 
displays a more dynamic pattern of associations within the microbiota of Culex 
pipiens f. molestus and Culex quinquefasciatus mosquitoes, than 
Escherichia-Shigella. The differential effects on network robustness upon 
Wolbachia or Escherichia-Shigella removal suggest that these bacteria play 
distinct roles in maintaining community stability within the microbiota of the 
two mosquito species.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12866-024-03593-x
PMCID: PMC11520040
PMID: 39455905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Pathogens. 2024 Oct 16;13(10):906. doi: 10.3390/pathogens13100906.

Schistosomiasis-Microbiota Interactions: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Afful P(1), Abotsi GK(1), Adu-Gyamfi CO(1), Benyem G(1), Katawa G(2), Kyei 
S(1)(3), Arndts K(4)(5), Ritter M(4)(5), Asare KK(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical and Clinical Research Centre, College of Health and Allied 
Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(2)Unité de Recherche en Immunologie et Immunomodulation (UR2IM)/Laboratoire de 
Microbiologie et de Contrôle de Qualité des Denrées Alimentaires (LAMICODA), 
Ecole Supérieure des Techniques Biologiques et Alimentaires, Université de Lomé, 
Lomé, Togo.
(3)Department of Optometry and Vision Science, College of Health and Allied 
Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(4)Institute for Medical Microbiology, Immunology, and Parasitology (IMMIP), 
University Hospital Bonn (UKB), 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(5)German-West African Centre for Global Health and Pandemic Prevention (G-WAC), 
Partner Site Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Allied Health Sciences, College 
of Health and Allied Sciences, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana.
(7)Department of Immunology, Noguchi Memorial Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana.

INTRODUCTION: Schistosomiasis, a tropical disease affecting humans and animals, 
affected 251.4 million people in 2021. Schistosoma mansoni, S. haematobium, S. 
intercalatum, and S. japonicum are primary human schistosomes, causing tissue 
damage, granulomas, ulceration, hemorrhage, and opportunistic pathogen entry. 
The gut and urinary tract microbiota significantly impact a host's 
susceptibility to schistosomiasis, disrupting microbial balance; however, this 
relationship is not well understood. This systematic review and meta-analysis 
explores the intricate relationship between schistosomiasis and the host's 
microbiota, providing crucial insights into disease pathogenesis and management.
METHODS: This systematic review used PRISMA guidelines to identify peer-reviewed 
articles on schistosomiasis and its interactions with the host microbiome, using 
multiple databases and Google Scholar, providing a robust dataset for analysis. 
The study utilized Meta-Mar v3.5.1; descriptive tests, random-effects models, 
and subgroups were analyzed for the interaction between Schistosomiasis and the 
microbiome. Forest plots, Cochran's Q test, and Higgins' inconsistency statistic 
(I2) were used to assess heterogeneity.
RESULTS: The human Schistosoma species were observed to be associated with 
various bacterial species isolated from blood, stool, urine, sputum, skin, and 
vaginal or cervical samples. A meta-analysis of the interaction between 
schistosomiasis and the host microbiome, based on 31 studies, showed 29,784 
observations and 5871 events. The pooled estimates indicated a significant 
association between schistosomiasis and changes in the microbiome of infected 
individuals. There was considerable heterogeneity with variance effect sizes (p 
< 0.0001). Subgroup analysis of Schistosoma species demonstrated that S. 
haematobium was the most significant contributor to the overall heterogeneity, 
accounting for 62.1% (p < 0.01). S. mansoni contributed 13.0% (p = 0.02), and 
the coinfection of S. haematobium and S. mansoni accounted for 16.8% of the 
heterogeneity (p < 0.01), contributing to the variability seen in the pooled 
analysis. Similarly, praziquantel treatment (RR = 1.68, 95% CI: 1.07-2.64) 
showed high heterogeneity (Chi2 = 71.42, df = 11, p < 0.01) and also indicated 
that Schistosoma infections in males (RR = 1.46, 95% CI: 0.00 to 551.30) and 
females (RR = 2.09, 95% CI: 0.24 to 18.31) have a higher risk of altering the 
host microbiome.
CONCLUSIONS: Schistosomiasis significantly disrupts the host microbiota across 
various bodily sites, leading to increased susceptibility to different bacterial 
taxa such as E. coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Salmonella, 
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, and Mycobacterium species (M. tuberculosis and M. 
leprae). This disruption enables these bacteria to produce toxic metabolites, 
which in turn cause inflammation and facilitate the progression of disease. The 
impact of schistosomiasis on the vaginal microbiome underscores the necessity 
for gender-specific approaches to treatment and prevention. Effective management 
of female genital schistosomiasis (FGS) requires addressing both the parasitic 
infection and the resulting microbiome imbalances. Additionally, 
praziquantel-treated individuals have different microbiome compositions compared 
to individuals with no praziquantel treatment. This suggests that combining 
praziquantel treatment with probiotics could potentially decrease the disease 
severity caused by an altered microbiome.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens13100906
PMCID: PMC11510367
PMID: 39452777

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. ISME J. 2024 Jan 8;18(1):wrae213. doi: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae213.

Taeniasis impacts human gut microbiome composition and function.

Mu W(1)(2), Ma P(1), Wang Y(1), Li Y(1), Ding Y(1), Zou Y(1), Pu L(1), Yan Q(1), 
Kong H(1), Guo X(1)(2), Guo A(1)(2), Li H(3), Wang S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Disease Control and Prevention, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, 
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 
Veterinary Research Institute, Lanzhou, Gansu 730046, China.
(3)Department of Parasitology, College of Basic Medicine, Dali University, Dali, 
Yunnan 671000, China.

Human taeniasis, caused by Taenia tapeworms, is a global parasitic disease with 
significant implications for public health and food safety. These tapeworms can 
grow to considerable sizes and potentially impact the microecology of the host 
gut. Despite their importance, the effects of Taenia infection on host gut 
microbiota haven't been thoroughly investigated. In this study, we conducted a 
cross-sectional analysis of the gut microbiome in patients infected with Taenia 
asiatica (n = 87) compared to healthy controls (n = 79) in the Dali cohort, 
China. We also performed a longitudinal assessment of microbial changes 
following deworming in a subset of patients (n = 24). Our findings reveal a 
significant shift in gut microbial composition, characterized by increased 
alpha-diversity and an enrichment of Prevotella-driven enterotypes in infected 
patients compared to healthy controls. The stability of these microbial features 
post-deworming varied widely among individuals and was lower in those with lower 
initial alpha diversity and Prevotella-enterotype before deworming. We observed 
a significant depletion of Bifidobacterium species in infected individuals, 
regardless of enterotypes, and these prebiotics did not recover post-deworming. 
Metabolic network analysis and in vitro experiments suggest that the reduction 
of Bifidobacterium was linked to metabolic competition for ecological niches or 
nutrients, particularly stachyose, from other microbes rather than the 
parasitism itself. Furthermore, our machine learning analysis demonstrated that 
taxa associated with Bifidobacterium in stachyose metabolism could robustly 
predict infection but could not predict deworming. This study highlights the 
substantial impact of taeniasis on the human gut microbiome and overall gut 
health.

© The Author(s) [2024]. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae213
PMCID: PMC11536184
PMID: 39441994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.

1. mBio. 2024 Nov 13;15(11):e0153424. doi: 10.1128/mbio.01534-24. Epub 2024 Oct
23.

Metal availability shapes early life microbial ecology and community succession.

Soto Ocaña J(#)(1)(2), Friedman ES(#)(3), Keenan O(1)(2), Bayard NU(1), Ford 
E(4)(5), Tanes C(4), Munneke MJ(6), Beavers WN(6), Skaar EP(6), Bittinger 
K(4)(7), Zemel BS(4)(5), Wu GD(3), Zackular JP(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Protective Immunity, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(4)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University 
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(7)The Center for Microbial Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

The gut microbiota plays a critical role in human health and disease. Microbial 
community assembly and succession early in life are influenced by numerous 
factors. In turn, assembly of this microbial community is known to influence the 
host, including immune system development, and has been linked to outcomes later 
in life. To date, the role of host-mediated nutritional immunity and metal 
availability in shaping microbial community assembly and succession early in 
life has not been explored in depth. Using a human infant cohort, we show that 
the metal-chelating protein calprotectin is highly abundant in infants. Taxa 
previously shown to be successful early colonizers of the infant gut, such as 
Enterococcus, Enterobacteriaceae, and Bacteroides, are highly resistant to 
experimental metal starvation in culture. Lactobacillus, meanwhile, is highly 
susceptible to metal restriction, pointing to a possible mechanism by which 
host-mediated metal limitation shapes the fitness of early colonizing taxa in 
the infant gut. We further demonstrate that formula-fed infants harbor markedly 
higher levels of metals in their gastrointestinal tract compared to breastfed 
infants. Formula-fed infants with high levels of metals harbor distinct 
microbial communities compared to breastfed infants, with higher levels of 
Enterococcus, Enterobacter, and Klebsiella, taxa which show increased resistance 
to the toxic effects of high metal concentrations. These data highlight a new 
paradigm in microbial community assembly and suggest an unappreciated role for 
nutritional immunity and dietary metals in shaping the earliest colonization 
events of the microbiota.IMPORTANCEEarly life represents a critical window for 
microbial colonization of the human gastrointestinal tract. Surprisingly, we 
still know little about the rules that govern the successful colonization of 
infants and the factors that shape the success of early life microbial 
colonizers. In this study, we report that metal availability is an important 
factor in the assembly and succession of the early life microbiota. We show that 
the host-derived metal-chelating protein, calprotectin, is highly abundant in 
infants and successful early life colonizers can overcome metal restriction. We 
further demonstrate that feeding modality (breastmilk vs formula) markedly 
impacts metal levels in the gut, potentially influencing microbial community 
succession. Our work suggests that metals, a previously unexplored aspect of 
early life ecology, may play a critical role in shaping the early events of 
microbiota assembly in infants.

DOI: 10.1128/mbio.01534-24
PMCID: PMC11558993
PMID: 39440978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Oct 21;12(1):210. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01918-6.

Balancing the scales: assessing the impact of irrigation and pathogen burden on 
potato blackleg disease and soil microbial communities.

Keating C(1)(2), Kilbride E(3), Stalham MA(4)(5), Nellist C(5), Milner J(6), 
Humphris S(7), Toth I(3)(7), Mable BK(3), Ijaz UZ(8).

Author information:
(1)School of Biodiversity, One Health, and Veterinary Medicine, College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. 
ciara.keating@durham.ac.uk.
(2)Present Address: Department of Engineering, Durham University, Durham, UK. 
ciara.keating@durham.ac.uk.
(3)School of Biodiversity, One Health, and Veterinary Medicine, College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Mark Stalham Potato Consultancy, Cambridge, UK.
(5)NIAB, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Plant Science Group, School of Molecular Biosciences, College of Medical, 
Veterinary & Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(7)Cell & Molecular Sciences, James Hutton Institute, Dundee, UK.
(8)James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. 
umer.ijaz@glasgow.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Understanding the interaction between environmental conditions, crop 
yields, and soil health is crucial for sustainable agriculture in a changing 
climate. Management practices to limit disease are a balancing act. For example, 
in potato production, dry conditions favour common scab (Streptomyces spp.) and 
wet conditions favour blackleg disease (Pectobacterium spp.). The exact 
mechanisms involved and how these link to changes in the soil microbiome are 
unclear. Our objectives were to test how irrigation management and bacterial 
pathogen load in potato seed stocks impact: (i) crop yields; (ii) disease 
development (blackleg or common scab); and (iii) soil microbial community 
dynamics.
METHODS: We used stocks of seed potatoes with varying natural levels of 
Pectobacterium (Jelly [high load], Jelly [low load] and Estima [Zero - no 
Pectobacterium]). Stocks were grown under four irrigation regimes that differed 
in the timing and level of watering. The soil microbial communities were 
profiled using amplicon sequencing at 50% plant emergence and at harvest. 
Generalised linear latent variable models and an annotation-free mathematical 
framework approach (ensemble quotient analysis) were then used to show the 
interacting microbes with irrigation regime and Pectobacterium pathogen levels.
RESULTS: Irrigation increased blackleg symptoms in the plots planted with stocks 
with low and high levels of Pectobacterium (22-34%) but not in the zero stock 
(2-6%). However, withholding irrigation increased common scab symptoms (2-5%) 
and reduced crop yields. Irrigation did not impact the composition of the soil 
microbiome, but planting stock with a high Pectobacterium burden resulted in an 
increased abundance of Planctomycetota, Anaerolinea and Acidobacteria species 
within the microbiome. Ensemble quotient analysis highlighted the Anaerolinea 
taxa were highly associated with high levels of Pectobacterium in the seed stock 
and blackleg symptoms in the field.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that planting seed stocks with a high Pectobacterium 
burden alters the abundance of specific microbial species within the soil 
microbiome and suggest that managing pathogen load in seed stocks could 
substantially affect soil communities, affecting crop health and productivity. 
Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01918-6
PMCID: PMC11492761
PMID: 39434184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. BJOG. 2024 Oct 21. doi: 10.1111/1471-0528.17979. Online ahead of print.

Oral, Vaginal, and Stool Microbial Signatures in Patients With Endometriosis as 
Potential Diagnostic Non-Invasive Biomarkers: A Prospective Cohort Study.

Hicks C(1), Leonardi M(2), Chua XY(1), Mari-Breedt L(1), Espanda M(2), El-Omar 
EM(1), Condous G(2), El-Assaad F(1).

Author information:
(1)Microbiome Research Centre, School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine & 
Health, St George & Sutherland Clinical Campuses, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.
(2)Endometriosis Ultrasound and Advanced Endosurgery Unit, Sydney Medical School 
Nepean, Nepean Hospital, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To identify a microbial signature for endometriosis for use as a 
diagnostic non-invasive biomarker.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort pilot study.
SETTING: Nepean Hospital and UNSW Microbiome Research Centre, Australia.
POPULATION: Sixty-four age- and sex-matched subjects (n = 19 healthy control 
(HC); n = 24 non-endometriosis (N-ENDO) and n = 21 confirmed endometriosis 
(ENDO)). All study participants, besides healthy controls, underwent 
laparoscopic surgical assessment for endometriosis, and histology was performed 
on excised lesions.
METHODS: Oral, stool and, vaginal samples were self-collected at a single time 
point for healthy controls, and preoperatively for patients undergoing 
laparoscopy. Samples underwent 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing, followed by 
bioinformatics analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Compositional differences between cohorts as identified 
by diversity analyses, and differentially abundant microbial taxa, as identified 
by LEfSE analysis.
RESULTS: The composition of the oral (adjusted p = 0.003), and stool (adjusted 
p = 0.042) microbiota is different between the three cohorts. Differentially 
abundant taxa are present within each cohort as identified by LEfSE analysis. 
Particularly, Fusobacterium was enriched in the oral samples of patients with 
moderate/severe endometriosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Taxonomic and compositional differences were found between the 
microbiota in the mouth, gut and, vagina of patients with and without 
endometriosis and healthy controls. Fusobacterium was enriched in patients with 
moderate/severe endometriosis. Fusobacterium is noted as a key pathogen in 
periodontal disease, a common comorbidity in endometriosis. These findings 
suggest a role for the oral, stool and, vaginal microbiome in endometriosis, and 
present potential for microbial-based treatments and the design of a diagnostic 
swab.

© 2024 The Author(s). BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and 
Gynaecology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1471-0528.17979
PMID: 39431364

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Oct 4;15:1423464. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1423464. eCollection 2024.

Calorie restriction during gestation impacts maternal and offspring fecal 
microbiome in mice.

Gilley SP(1), Ruebel ML(2)(3), Chintapalli SV(3)(4), Wright CJ(5), Rozance 
PJ(5), Shankar K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Nutrition, University of Colorado School 
of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.
(2)Microbiome and Metabolism Research Unit (MMRU), United States Department of 
Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service (USDA-ARS), Southeast Area, Little 
Rock, AR, United States.
(3)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock, AR, United States.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR, United States.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neonatology, University of Colorado 
School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United States.

BACKGROUND: Maternal undernutrition is the most common cause of fetal growth 
restriction (FGR) worldwide. FGR increases morbidity and mortality during 
infancy, as well as contributes to adult-onset diseases including obesity and 
type 2 diabetes. The role of the maternal or offspring microbiome in growth 
outcomes following FGR is not well understood.
METHODS: FGR was induced by 30% maternal calorie restriction (CR) during the 
second half of gestation in C57BL/6 mice. Pup weights were obtained on day of 
life 0, 1, and 7 and ages 3, 4 and 16 weeks. Fecal pellets were collected from 
pregnant dams at gestational day 18.5 and from offspring at ages 3 and 4 weeks 
of age. Bacterial genomic DNA was used for amplification of the V4 variable 
region of the 16S rRNA gene. Multivariable associations between maternal CR and 
taxonomic abundance were assessed using the MaAsLin2 package. Associations 
between microbial taxa and offspring outcomes were performed using 
distance-based redundancy analysis and Pearson correlations.
RESULTS: FGR pups weighed about 20% less than controls. Beta but not alpha 
diversity differed between control and CR dam microbiomes. CR dams had lower 
relative abundance of Turicibacter, Flexispira, and Rikenella, and increased 
relative abundance of Parabacteroides and Prevotella. Control and FGR offspring 
microbiota differed by beta diversity at ages 3 and 4 weeks. At 3 weeks, FGR 
offspring had decreased relative abundance of Akkermansia and Sutterella and 
increased relative abundance of Anaerostipes and Paraprevotella. At 4 weeks, FGR 
animals had decreased relative abundance of Allobaculum, Sutterella, 
Bifidobacterium, and Lactobacillus, among others, and increased relative 
abundance of Turcibacter, Dorea, and Roseburia. Maternal Helicobacter abundance 
was positively associated with offspring weight. Akkermansia abundance at age 3 
and 4 weeks was negatively associated with adult weight.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate gut microbial dysbiosis in pregnant dams and 
offspring at two timepoints following maternal calorie restriction. Additional 
research is needed to test for functional roles of the microbiome in offspring 
growth outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Gilley, Ruebel, Chintapalli, Wright, Rozance and Shankar.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1423464
PMCID: PMC11487197
PMID: 39429739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. J Affect Disord. 2025 Jan 15;369:819-833. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.10.042. Epub
 2024 Oct 17.

Impact of antidepressants on the composition of the gut microbiome: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of in vivo studies.

Gamboa J(1), Le GH(2), Wong S(3), Alteza EAI(4), Zachos KA(4), Teopiz KM(5), 
McIntyre RS(6).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Cognition Discovery Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute 
of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Brain and Cognition Discovery Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute 
of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Mood 
Disorder and Psychopharmacology Unit, University Health Network, Toronto, 
Canada.
(3)Brain and Cognition Discovery Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada; Mood Disorder and Psychopharmacology Unit, University Health 
Network, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.
(5)Brain and Cognition Discovery Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Brain and Cognition Discovery Foundation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Institute 
of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department 
of Pharmacology & Toxicology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Mood 
Disorder and Psychopharmacology Unit, University Health Network, Toronto, 
Canada. Electronic address: roger.mcintyre@bcdf.org.

BACKGROUND: There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that antidepressant 
drugs (ADs) alter the gut microbiome of persons with depressive disorders. 
Herein, we aim to investigate the gut microbial profile of AD-treated animal 
models of depression (MoD) and persons with major depressive disorder (MDD).
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis investigating the 
gut microbiome community-level diversity and relative abundance of microbial 
taxa in AD-treated animal MoD and persons with MDD.
RESULTS: 24 human studies (898 participants) and 48 animal studies (849 
subjects) were identified. Nonsignificant differences in gut microbial richness 
were observed between AD-treated and nonmedicated animals and humans. Beta 
diversity analysis in animals shows that AD intake is linked to a distinct gut 
microbial profile, a result not observed in humans. Consistent depletion of the 
genera Faecalibacterium and Parasutterella, along with enrichment of 
Bifidobacterium, was observed in AD-treated persons with MDD. In AD-treated 
animals, AD intake was associated with depletion of Flavobacterium and 
Adlercreutzia, and enrichment of Parabacteroides.
LIMITATIONS: The studies in our review were heterogeneous in their participant 
population, dietary intake, type of ADs used, length and dosing of AD treatment, 
and frequency and time of fecal sample collection.
CONCLUSION: ADs are associated with some changes to the gut microbiome. Future 
studies should evaluate the gut microbiome profiles between depressive disorder 
diagnoses that may reveal potential differences and predictors of AD response, 
as well as new combinatorial therapeutics with agents (e.g., specific-strain 
probiotic adjunctive treatment) that can ameliorate micro-composition gut 
dysbiosis.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.10.042
PMID: 39424151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest Roger S. 
McIntyre has received research grant support from CIHR/GACD/National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (NSFC) and the Milken Institute; 
speaker/consultation fees from Lundbeck, Janssen, Alkermes, Neumora 
Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Sage, Biogen, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Purdue, 
Pfizer, Otsuka, Takeda, Neurocrine, Sunovion, Bausch Health, Axsome, Novo 
Nordisk, Kris, Sanofi, Eisai, Intra-Cellular, NewBridge Pharmaceuticals,Viatris, 
Abbvie, Atai Life Sciences. Dr. Roger McIntyre is a CEO of Braxia Scientific 
Corp. Kayla M. Teopiz has received fees from Braxia Scientific Corp. Jann 
Gamboa, Gia Han Le, Sabrina Wong, Eugene Alfonzo II Alteza and Kassandra Zachos 
have no conflicts of interest to declare.

1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2024 Oct 17:izae199. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izae199. Online ahead
 of print.

Gut Microbial Signatures in Pediatric Crohn's Disease Vary According to Disease 
Activity Measures and Are Influenced by Proxies of Gastrointestinal Transit 
Time: An ImageKids Study.

Nichols B(1), Russell RK(2), Short B(1), Papadopoulou R(1), Focht G(3), Ijaz 
UZ(4), Walters TD(5), Sladek M(6), Hansen R(7), Mack DR(8)(9), Wine E(10), 
Griffiths AM(5), Turner D(3), Gerasimidis K(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Nutrition, School of Medicine, Dentistry & Nursing, University of 
Glasgow, New Lister Building, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, Glasgow G31 2ER, UK.
(2)Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Royal Hospital for Children and 
Young People, 50 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
(3)Juliet Keidan Institute of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
Israel.
(4)James Watt School of Engineering, University of Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Cracow, Poland.
(7)Division of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, University 
of Dundee, Dundee, UK.
(8)CHEO Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centre, Division of Gastroenterology, 
Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON K1H 
8L1, Canada.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: We investigated relationships between disease activity measures 
and the gut microbiome in children with Crohn's disease (CD) and how these were 
confounded by gastrointestinal transit time.
METHODS: Microbiome was profiled (16S rRNA sequencing) in feces from 196 
children with CD. Sixty participants also provided samples after 18 months. 
Mural inflammation (Pediatric Inflammatory Crohn's Magnetic Resonance 
Enterography Index, PICMI), the simple endoscopic score for CD, and the weighted 
pediatric Crohn's disease activity index (wPCDAI) were assessed. Fecal 
calprotectin, plasma C-reactive protein (CRP), and fecal water content (FWC), a 
proxy of gastrointestinal transit time, were measured too.
RESULTS: Microbiome α diversity, clustering, and differential taxa were related 
to disease status, but varied remarkably by disease activity measure used. The 
strongest relationships between microbiome and disease activity status were 
observed using wPCDAI; fewer or no relationships were seen using more objective 
measures like PICMI. Taxa predictive of disease activity status were dependent 
on the disease activity measure used with negligible overlap. Active disease was 
associated with more pathobionts (eg, Viellonella, Enterobacterales) and fewer 
fiber-fermenting organisms. The effect FWC had on microbiome superseded the 
effect of active disease for all disease activity measures, particularly with 
wPCDAI. Accounting for FWC, the differences in microbial signatures explained by 
disease activity status were attenuated or lost.
CONCLUSIONS: In CD, microbiome signatures fluctuate depending on the measure 
used to assess disease severity; several of these signals might be secondary 
disease effects linked with changes in gut motility in active disease. PICMI 
appears to be less influenced when studying relationships between microbiome and 
mural inflammation in CD.

Plain Language Summary: Microbiome signatures are related to Crohn’s disease 
status but vary remarkably by disease activity measure used. The effect gut 
transit time has on microbiome supersedes and confounds the effect of active 
disease, particularly with the use of less objective disease activity measures.

© 2024 Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation. Published by Oxford University Press on 
behalf of Crohn’s & Colitis Foundation.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izae199
PMID: 39419819

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2024 Oct 17:ard-2024-225735. doi: 10.1136/ard-2024-225735.
Online  ahead of print.

Microbiome research in autoimmune and immune-mediated inflammatory diseases: 
lessons, advances and unmet needs.

Scher JU(1), Nayak R(2)(3), Clemente JC(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, NYU Psoriatic Arthritis Center, and NYU Colton Center 
for Autoimmunity, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York, 
USA jose.scher@nyulangone.org.
(2)University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)San Francisco VA Medical Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, New York, USA.

The increasing prevalence of autoimmune and immune-mediated diseases (AIMDs) 
underscores the need to understand environmental factors that contribute to 
their pathogenesis, with the microbiome emerging as a key player. Despite 
significant advancements in understanding how the microbiome influences 
physiological and inflammatory responses, translating these findings into 
clinical practice remains challenging. This viewpoint reviews the progress and 
obstacles in microbiome research related to AIMDs, examining molecular 
techniques that enhance our understanding of microbial contributions to disease. 
We discuss significant discoveries linking specific taxa and metabolites to 
diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus and 
spondyloarthritis, highlighting the role of gut dysbiosis and host-microbiome 
interactions. Furthermore, we explore the potential of microbiome-based 
therapeutics, including faecal microbiota transplantation and 
pharmacomicrobiomics, while addressing the challenges of identifying robust 
microbial targets. We advocate for integrative, transdisease studies and 
emphasise the need for diverse cohort research to generalise findings across 
populations. Understanding the microbiome's role in AIMDs will pave the way for 
personalised medicine and innovative therapeutic strategies.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ on behalf of EULAR.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2024-225735
PMID: 39419539

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JCC and RN have no 
conflicts to declare. JUS has served as a consultant for Janssen, Pfizer, 
Sanofi, UCB and BMS; and has received funding for investigator-initiated studies 
from Janssen and Pfizer.

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Oct 13:2024.10.11.617902. doi: 
10.1101/2024.10.11.617902.

Small amounts of misassembly can have disproportionate effects on 
pangenome-based metagenomic analyses.

Majernik SN(1), Beaver L(1), Bradley PH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Microbiology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.
(2)Infectious Diseases Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 
USA.
(3)Center of Microbiome Science, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 
USA.

Individual genes from microbiomes can drive host-level phenotypes. To help 
identify such candidate genes, several recent tools estimate microbial gene copy 
numbers directly from metagenomes. These tools rely on alignments to pangenomes, 
which in turn are derived from the set of all individual genomes from one 
species. While large-scale metagenomic assembly efforts have made pangenome 
estimates more complete, mixed communities can also introduce contamination into 
assemblies, and it is unknown how robust pangenome-based metagenomic analyses 
are to these errors. To gain insight into this problem, we re-analyzed a 
case-control study of the gut microbiome in cirrhosis, focusing on commensal 
Clostridia previously implicated in this disease. We tested for differentially 
prevalent genes in the Lachnospiraceae, then investigated which were likely to 
be contaminants using sequence similarity searches. Out of 86 differentially 
prevalent genes, we found that 33 (38%) were probably contaminants originating 
in taxa such as Veillonella and Haemophilus, unrelated genera that were 
independently correlated with disease status. Our results demonstrate that even 
small amounts of contamination in metagenome assemblies, below typical quality 
thresholds, can threaten to overwhelm gene-level metagenomic analyses. However, 
we also show that such contaminants can be accurately identified using a method 
based on gene-to-species correlation. After removing these contaminants, we 
observe that several flagellar motility gene clusters in the Lachnospira eligens 
pangenome are associated with cirrhosis status. We have integrated our analyses 
into an analysis and visualization pipeline, PanSweep, that can automatically 
identify cases where pangenome contamination may bias the results of 
gene-resolved analyses.
IMPORTANCE: Metagenome-assembled genomes, or MAGs, can be constructed without 
pure cultures of microbes. Large scale efforts to build MAGs have yielded more 
complete pangenomes (i.e., sets of all genes found in one species). Pangenomes 
allow us to measure strain variation in gene content, which can strongly affect 
phenotype. However, because MAGs come from mixed communities, they can 
contaminate pangenomes with unrelated DNA, and how much this impacts downstream 
analyses has not been studied. Using a metagenomic study of gut microbes in 
cirrhosis as our test case, we investigate how contamination affects analyses of 
microbial gene content. Surprisingly, even small, typical amounts of MAG 
contamination (<5%) result in disproportionately high levels of false positive 
associations (38%). Fortunately, we show that most contaminants can be 
automatically flagged, and provide a simple method for doing so. Furthermore, 
applying this method reveals a new association between cirrhosis and gut 
microbial motility.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.10.11.617902
PMCID: PMC11482961
PMID: 39416140

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts The authors declare no conflict of 
interest.

1. Microbiome. 2024 Oct 15;12(1):200. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01911-z.

Combating wheat yellow mosaic virus through microbial interactions and hormone 
pathway modulations.

Wang F(1), Zhang H(2), Liu H(3), Wu C(1), Wan Y(1), Zhu L(1), Yang J(1), Cai 
P(4), Chen J(1), Ge T(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China. zhanghaoqing@nbu.edu.cn.
(3)Hawkesbury Institute for the Environment, Western Sydney University, Penrith, 
NSW, 2753, Australia.
(4)National Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Resources 
and Environment, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.
(5)State Key Laboratory for Managing Biotic and Chemical Threats to the Quality 
and Safety of Agro-products, Key Laboratory of Biotechnology in Plant Protection 
of Ministry of Agriculture and Zhejiang Province, Institute of Plant Virology, 
Ningbo University, Ningbo, 315211, China. getida@nbu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The rhizosphere microbiome is critical for promoting plant growth 
and mitigating soil-borne pathogens. However, its role in fighting soil-borne 
virus-induced diseases, such as wheat yellow mosaic virus (WYMV) transmitted by 
Polymyxa graminis zoospores, remains largely underexplored. In this study, we 
hypothesized that during viral infections, plant microbiomes engage in critical 
interactions with plants, with key microbes playing vital roles in maintaining 
plant health. Our research aimed to identify microbial taxa that not only 
suppress the disease but also boost wheat yield by using a blend of techniques, 
including field surveys, yield assessments, high-throughput sequencing of plant 
and soil microbiomes, microbial isolation, hydroponic experiments, and 
transcriptome sequencing.
RESULTS: We found that, compared with roots and leaves, the rhizosphere 
microbiome showed a better performance in predicting wheat yield and the 
prevalence of P. graminis and WYMV across the three WYMV-impacted regions in 
China. Using machine learning, we found that healthy rhizospheres were marked 
with potentially beneficial microorganisms, such as Sphingomonas and 
Allorhizobium-Neorhizobium-Parararhizobium-Rhizobium, whereas diseased 
rhizospheres were associated with a higher prevalence of potential pathogens, 
such as Bipolaris and Fusicolla. Structural equation modeling showed that these 
biomarkers both directly and indirectly impacted wheat yield by modulating the 
rhizosphere microbiome and P. graminis abundance. Upon re-introduction of two 
key healthy rhizosphere biomarkers, Sphingomonas azotifigens and Rhizobium 
deserti, into the rhizosphere, wheat growth and health were enhanced. This was 
attributed to the up-regulation of auxin and cytokinin signaling pathways and 
the regulation of jasmonic acid and salicylic acid pathways during infections.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our study revealed the critical role of the rhizosphere 
microbiome in combating soil-borne viral diseases, with specific rhizosphere 
microbes playing key roles in this process. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01911-z
PMCID: PMC11481568
PMID: 39407339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. ISME J. 2024 Jan 8;18(1):wrae203. doi: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae203.

Dispersal of microbes from grassland fire smoke to soils.

Ellington AJ(1), Walters K(2), Christner BC(1), Fox S(2), Bonfantine K(2), 
Walker C(3), Lampman P(2), Vuono DC(4), Strickland M(5), Lambert K(5), Kobziar 
LN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Science, Institute of Food and 
Agricultural Science, University of Florida, P.O. Box 110700 Gainesville, FL 
32611, United States.
(2)Department of Forest, Rangeland, and Fire Sciences, University of Idaho, 1031 
N. Academic Way, Coeur d'Alene, ID 83814, United States.
(3)Department of Biology, Brigham Young University - Idaho, 525 S Center St., 
Rexburg, ID 83460, United States.
(4)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Colorado School of Mines, 
1500 Illinois St., Golden, CO 80401, United States.
(5)Department of Soil and Water Systems, University of Idaho, 875 Perimeter 
Drive, Moscow, ID 83844, United States.

Wildland fire is increasingly recognized as a driver of bioaerosol emissions, 
but the effects that smoke-emitted microbes have on the diversity and community 
assembly patterns of the habitats where they are deposited remain unknown. In 
this study, we examined whether microbes aerosolized by biomass burning smoke 
detectably impact the composition and function of soil sinks using lab-based 
mesocosm experiments. Soils either containing the native microbial community or 
presterilized by γ-irradiation were inundated with various doses of smoke from 
native tallgrass prairie grasses. Smoke-inundated, γ-irradiated soils exhibited 
significantly higher respiration rates than both smoke-inundated, native soils 
and γ-irradiated soils exposed to ambient air only. Microbial communities in 
γ-irradiated soils were significantly different between smoke-treated and 
control soils, which supports the hypothesis that wildland fire smoke can act as 
a dispersal agent. Community compositions differed based on smoke dose, 
incubation time, and soil type. Concentrations of phosphate and microbial 
biomass carbon and nitrogen together with pH were significant predictors of 
community composition. Source tracking analysis attributed smoke as contributing 
nearly 30% of the taxa found in smoke-inundated, γ-irradiated soils, suggesting 
smoke may play a role in the recovery of microbial communities in similar 
damaged soils. Our findings demonstrate that short-distance microbial dispersal 
by biomass burning smoke can influence the assembly processes of microbial 
communities in soils and has implications for a broad range of subjects 
including agriculture, restoration, plant disease, and biodiversity.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
International Society for Microbial Ecology.

DOI: 10.1093/ismejo/wrae203
PMCID: PMC11525542
PMID: 39404077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.

1. Clin Cosmet Investig Dermatol. 2024 Oct 7;17:2231-2241. doi: 
10.2147/CCID.S473237. eCollection 2024.

Oral Microbiota Variations in Psoriasis Patients Without Comorbidity.

Zhao K(#)(1), Zhao Y(#)(2), Guo A(1), Xiao S(1), Tu C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong 
University, Xi'an, 710004, People's Republic of China.
(2)National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center of Biodiagnosis and 
Biotherapy, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
710004, People's Republic of China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory skin disease, and its etiology 
is still unclear. There is increasing evidence suggesting that microorganisms 
may trigger psoriasis. However, the relationship between psoriasis and oral 
microbiota remains poorly understood. Our aim is to identify differences in the 
composition and diversity of the oral microbiota between patients with psoriasis 
and healthy controls, and to discover oral microbial markers for assessing the 
severity of psoriasis.
METHODS: This study recruited 20 psoriasis patients and 20 healthy individuals, 
collecting their saliva to analyze the composition of the oral microbiota in 
psoriasis patients. We employed 16S rRNA sequencing technology and utilized 
various methods for oral microbiome analysis, including the Shannon Index, 
Gini-Simpson Index, Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA), non-metric 
multidimensional scaling (NMDS), Linear discriminant analysis Effect Size 
(LEfSe), Wilcoxon test, and Spearman's rank correlation.
RESULTS: The results showed that the alpha diversity of oral microbiota was 
higher in psoriasis patients. The relative abundances of certain bacterial taxa 
differed between psoriasis and healthy individuals, including Prevotella, 
Prevotella 7 and Porphyromonas gingivalis, which are increased in psoriasis. We 
also found a positive correlation between Alloprevotella, Porphyromonas, and 
Neisseria with the severity of psoriasis, while Veillonella showed a negative 
correlation.
CONCLUSION: In summary, this study found significant changes in the composition 
of the oral microbiota in patients with psoriasis. Some oral bacteria are 
associated with psoriasis severity. It provides a new perspective on the 
relationship between the oral microbiota and psoriasis.

© 2024 Zhao et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CCID.S473237
PMCID: PMC11468564
PMID: 39399065

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.

1. JOR Spine. 2024 Oct 10;7(4):e70005. doi: 10.1002/jsp2.70005. eCollection 2024 
Dec.

Gut microbiome dysbiosis is associated with lumbar degenerative 
spondylolisthesis in symptomatic patients.

Aboushaala K(1), Chee AV(1), Adnan D(2), Toro SJ(1), Singh H(1), Savoia A(1), 
Dhillon ES(1), Yuh C(1), Dourdourekas J(1), Patel IK(1), Vucicevic R(1), 
Espinoza-Orias AA(1), Martin JT(1), Oh C(1), Keshavarzian A(3), Albert HB(1), 
Karppinen J(4), Kocak M(5), Wong AYL(6), Goldberg EJ(1), Phillips FM(1), Colman 
MW(1), Williams FMK(1)(7), Borgia JA(8), Naqib A(3), Green SJ(3), Forsyth CB(3), 
An HS(1), Samartzis D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery Rush University Medical Center Chicago 
Illinois USA.
(2)Center for Integrated Microbiome & Chronobiology Research, Rush Medical 
College, Rush University Medical Center Chicago Illinois USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine Rush University Medical Center Chicago 
Illinois USA.
(4)Research Unit of Health Sciences and Technology University of Oulu Oulu 
Finland.
(5)Department of Radiology & Nuclear Medicine Rush University Medical Center 
Chicago Illinois USA.
(6)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
Hong Kong China.
(7)Department of Twins Research and Genetic Epidemiology King's College London 
UK.
(8)Departments of Anatomy & Cell Biology and Pathology Rush University Medical 
Center Chicago Illinois USA.

BACKGROUND: Lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis (LDS), characterized as 
degeneration of the intervertebral disc and structural changes of the facet 
joints, is a condition with varying degrees of instability that may lead to 
pain, canal stenosis, and subsequent surgical intervention. However, the 
etiology of LDS remains inconclusive. Gut microbiome dysbiosis may stimulate 
systemic inflammation in various disorders. However, the role of such dysbiosis 
upon spine health remains under-studied. The current study assessed the 
association of gut microbiome dysbiosis in symptomatic patients with or without 
LDS.
METHODS: A cross-sectional analysis within the framework of a prospective study 
was performed. DNA was extracted from fecal samples collected from adult 
symptomatic patients with (n = 21) and without LDS (n = 12). Alpha and beta 
diversity assessed differences in fecal microbial community between groups. 
Taxon-by-taxon analysis identified microbial features with differential relative 
abundance between groups. Subject demographics and imaging parameters were also 
assessed.
RESULTS: There was no significant group differences in age, sex, race, body mass 
index, smoking/alcohol history, pain profiles, spinopelvic alignment, and Modic 
changes (p >0.05). LDS subjects had significantly higher disc degeneration 
severity (p = 0.018) and alpha diversity levels compared to non-LDS subjects 
(p = 0.002-0.003). Significant differences in gut microbial community structure 
were observed between groups (p = 0.046). Subjects with LDS exhibited distinct 
differences at the phylum level, with a significantly higher Firmicutes to 
Bacteroidota ratio compared to non-LDS (p = 0.003). Differential relative 
abundance analysis identified six taxa with significant differences between the 
two groups, with LDS demonstrating an increase in putative pro-inflammatory 
bacteria (Dialister, CAG-352) and a decrease in anti-inflammatory bacteria 
(Slackia, Escherichia-Shigella).
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to report a significant association of gut 
microbiome dysbiosis and LDS in symptomatic patients, noting pro-inflammatory 
bacterial taxa. This work provides a foundation for future studies addressing 
the role of the gut microbiome in association with spine health and disease.

© 2024 The Author(s). JOR Spine published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of 
Orthopaedic Research Society.

DOI: 10.1002/jsp2.70005
PMCID: PMC11467165
PMID: 39398942

1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2024 Oct 10. doi: 10.1038/s41579-024-01108-z. Online ahead
of  print.

The gut microbiome and dietary fibres: implications in obesity, cardiometabolic 
diseases and cancer.

Delzenne NM(1), Bindels LB(2)(3), Neyrinck AM(2), Walter J(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute, 
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. 
nathalie.delzenne@uclouvain.be.
(2)Metabolism and Nutrition Research Group, Louvain Drug Research Institute, 
Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)WELBIO Department, WEL Research Institute, Wavre, Belgium.
(4)APC Microbiome Ireland, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(5)Department of Medicine, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(6)School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.

Dietary fibres constitute a heterogeneous class of nutrients that are key in the 
prevention of various chronic diseases. Most dietary fibres are fermented by the 
gut microbiome and may, thereby, modulate the gut microbial ecology and 
metabolism, impacting human health. Dietary fibres may influence the occurrence 
of specific bacterial taxa, with this effect varying between individuals. The 
effect of dietary fibres on microbial diversity is a matter of debate. Most 
intervention studies with dietary fibres in the context of obesity and related 
metabolic disorders reveal the need for an accurate assessment of the microbiome 
to better understand the variable response to dietary fibres. Epidemiological 
studies confirm that a high dietary fibre intake is strongly associated with a 
reduced occurrence of many types of cancer. However, there is a need to 
determine the impact of intervention with specific dietary fibres on cancer 
risk, therapy efficacy and toxicity, as well as in cancer cachexia. In this 
Review, we summarize the mechanisms by which the gut microbiome can mediate the 
physiological benefits of dietary fibres in the contexts of obesity, 
cardiometabolic diseases and cancer, their incidence being clearly linked to low 
dietary fibre intake.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41579-024-01108-z
PMID: 39390291

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Oct 10;14(1):23701. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6.

Dysbiotic signatures and diagnostic potential of gut microbial markers for 
inflammatory bowel disease in Korean population.

Kim HS(#)(1), Oh SJ(#)(2), Kim BK(#)(3), Kim JE(2), Kim BH(4)(5), Park YK(3), 
Yang BG(3), Lee JY(6), Bae JW(7)(8)(9), Lee CK(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(3)Research Institute, GI Biome Inc., Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Kyung Hee University 
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(5)East-West Medical Research Institute, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(6)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Biology, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(8)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea. baejw@khu.ac.kr.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Center for Crohn's and Colitis, Kyung Hee 
University Hospital, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea. gidrlee@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Fecal samples were collected from 640 individuals in Korea, including 523 
patients with IBD (223 with Crohn's disease [CD] and 300 with ulcerative colitis 
[UC]) and 117 healthy controls. The samples were subjected to cross-sectional 
gut metagenomic analysis using 16 S rRNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis. 
Patients with IBD, particularly those with CD, exhibited significantly lower 
alpha diversities than the healthy subjects. Differential abundance analysis 
revealed dysbiotic signatures, characterized by an expansion of the genus 
Escherichia-Shigella in patients with CD. Functional annotations showed that 
functional pathways related to bacterial pathogenesis and production of hydrogen 
sulfide (H2S) were strongly upregulated in patients with CD. A dysbiosis score, 
calculated based on functional characteristics, highly correlated with disease 
severity. Markers distinguishing between healthy subjects and patients with IBD 
showed accurate classification based on a small number of microbial taxa, which 
may be used to diagnose ambiguous cases. These findings confirm the taxonomic 
and functional dysbiosis of the gut microbiota in patients with IBD, especially 
those with CD. Taxa indicative of dysbiosis may have significant implications 
for future clinical research on the management and diagnosis of IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-74002-6
PMCID: PMC11467411
PMID: 39390011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Data Brief. 2024 Sep 19;57:110957. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110957. eCollection
 2024 Dec.

Dataset of 16S rRNA gene sequences of 111 healthy and Newcastle disease infected 
caecal samples from multiple chicken breeds of Pakistan.

Ameer A(1)(2), Saleem F(1), Keating C(3)(4), Gundogdu O(5), Ijaz UZ(2)(6)(7), 
Javed S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Water & Environment Research Group, University of Glasgow, Mazumdar-Shaw 
Advanced Research Centre, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Engineering, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK.
(4)School of Biodiversity, One Health, and Veterinary Medicine, College of 
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Infection Biology, Faculty of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Molecular and Clinical Cancer Medicine, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(7)College of Science and Engineering, University of Galway, Ireland.

The article presents a processed dataset from amplicon sequencing of the V4 
region of the 16S rRNA gene to recover bacterial and archaeal taxa from the 
caeca of multiple chicken breeds of Pakistan. These include chicken breeds 
commonly raised at commercial level, Naked Neck, Black Australorp, Rhode Island 
Red, White Layer, and Broiler. All the breeds were challenged with Newcastle 
Disease Virus (NDV), with vaccination against the disease also explored. This 
resulted in samples belonging to four treatment groups as: Control; Vaccinated; 
Vaccinated and Challenged; and Non-vaccinated and Challenged. These were raised 
on an antibiotic free diet in a semi-controlled farming setup. 16S rRNA gene 
amplicon sequencing of caecal DNA from day old and mature chicken samples (22 
weeks for Naked Neck, Black Australorp, Rhode Island Red and White Layer; 8 
weeks for Broiler) of the four groups was performed. The paired-end reads from 
all the samples were quality trimmed, error corrected, and overlapped, on which 
unique Operational Taxonomic Units (OTUs) were obtained at 99 % similarity. 
Using predictive modelling, the MetaCyc functional pathways, as well as KEGG 
orthologs were also recovered. The generated data may be used to explore 
microbial interactions in gastrointestinal tract with respect to NDV vaccination 
and infection, together with increased understanding of chicken health and 
productivity.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.dib.2024.110957
PMCID: PMC11461973
PMID: 39386325

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Nov;14(11):2971-2986. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01281-2. Epub 2024 Oct 10.

Association Between Scalp Microbiota Imbalance, Disease Severity, and Systemic 
Inflammatory Markers in Alopecia Areata.

Gómez-Arias PJ(#)(1)(2), Gay-Mimbrera J(#)(1), Rivera-Ruiz I(1)(2), 
Aguilar-Luque M(1), Juan-Cencerrado M(1)(2), Mochón-Jiménez C(1)(2), 
Gómez-García F(1)(2), Sánchez-González S(3), Ortega-Hernández A(3), Gómez-Garre 
D(4), Parra-Peralbo E(5), Isla-Tejera B(6)(7), Ruano J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Inflammatory Immune-Mediated Chronic Skin Diseases Laboratory, IMIBIC/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, 14004, Córdoba, Spain.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Reina Sofía University Hospital, 14004, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(3)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Microbiota, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), 4ª Planta Sur, C/ 
Profesor Martín Lagos, S/N, 28040, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Laboratory of Vascular Biology and Microbiota, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos (IdISSC), 4ª Planta Sur, C/ 
Profesor Martín Lagos, S/N, 28040, Madrid, Spain. mgomezgarre@salud.madrid.org.
(5)Department of Pharmacy and Nutrition, Faculty of Biomedical Science and 
Health, Universidad Europea, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Inflammatory Immune-Mediated Chronic Skin Diseases Laboratory, IMIBIC/Reina 
Sofia University Hospital/University of Cordoba, 14004, Córdoba, Spain. 
beatrizislatj@gmail.com.
(7)Department of Pharmacy, Reina Sofía University Hospital, 14004, Córdoba, 
Spain. beatrizislatj@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Alopecia areata (AA) is an autoimmune disease causing non-scarring 
hair loss, with both genetic and environmental factors implicated. Recent 
research highlights a possible role for scalp microbiota in influencing both 
local and systemic inflammatory responses, potentially impacting AA progression. 
This study examines the link among scalp microbiota imbalances, AA severity, and 
systemic inflammation.
METHODS: We conducted a cross-sectional study with 24 participants, including 
patients with AA of varying severities and healthy controls. Scalp microbial 
communities were analyzed using swab samples and ion torrent sequencing of the 
16S rRNA gene across multiple hypervariable regions. We explored correlations 
among bacterial abundance, microbiome metabolic pathways, and circulating 
inflammatory markers.
RESULTS: Our findings reveal significant dysbiosis in the scalp microbiota of 
patients with AA compared to healthy controls. Severe AA cases had an increased 
presence of pro-inflammatory microbial taxa like Proteobacteria, whereas milder 
cases had higher levels of anti-inflammatory Actinobacteria. Notable species 
differences included abundant gram-negative bacteria such as Alistipes inops and 
Bacteroides pleibeius in severe AA, contrasted with Blautia faecis and 
Pyramydobacter piscolens predominantly in controls. Significantly, microbial 
imbalance correlated with AA severity (SALT scores) and systemic inflammatory 
markers, with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines linked to more severe disease.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that scalp microbiota may play a role in 
AA-related inflammation, although it is unclear whether the shifts are a cause 
or consequence of hair loss. Further research is needed to clarify the causal 
relationship and mechanisms involved.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01281-2
PMCID: PMC11557780
PMID: 39384736

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Conflict of Interest Juan Ruano is 
a member of the Editorial Board of Dermatology and Therapy but was not involved 
in the peer review or editorial decisions for this manuscript. All other (Pedro 
J. Gómez-Arias, Jesús Gay-Mimbrera, Irene Rivera-Ruiz, Macarena Aguilar-Luque, 
Miguel Juan-Cencerrado, Carmen Mochón-Jiménez, Francisco Gómez-García, Silvia 
Sánchez-González, Adriana Ortega-Hernández, Dulcenombre Gómez-Garre, Esmeralda 
Parra-Peralbo and Beatriz Isla-Tejera) co-authors declare no conflicts of 
interest. Ethical Approval Reviewed and approved by Provincial Research Ethics 
Committee of Córdoba, Spain; approval # HRP-503, August 2015. The legislation in 
effect in 2015 has not changed in a way that would impact the validity of the 
approval, and the original approved protocol remains relevant to the current 
study. No changes have been made to the study, such as modifications in 
methodology, inclusion of new participants, or alterations in study conditions, 
that would invalidate the initial approval. The research was conducted following 
the standards of good clinical practice and adhering to the principles outlined 
in the by the Helsinki Declaration of 1975, as revised in 1983, and Belmont 
Report and adhered to Spanish and European laws regarding data privacy. Before 
participation, all patients provided informed consent after receiving and 
reviewing the patient information sheet.

1. Gut Pathog. 2024 Oct 8;16(1):58. doi: 10.1186/s13099-024-00643-7.

Dietary patterns drive loss of fiber-foraging species in the celiac disease 
patients gut microbiota compared to first-degree relatives.

Roque A(1), Zanker J(1), Brígido S(2), Tomaz MB(2), Gonçalves A(3), Barbeiro 
S(3), Benítez-Páez A(#)(4), Pereira SG(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology (ciTechCare), School of 
Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria, 2410-541, Leiria, Portugal.
(2)Labeto, Centro de Análises Bioquímicas SA, Beatriz Godinho Laboratories, 
2410-152, Leiria, Portugal.
(3)Gastroentherology Division, Leiria Central Hospital, Leiria Region Local 
Health Unit, 2410-197, Leiria, Portugal.
(4)Microbiome, Nutrition, and Health Research Unit, Institute of Agrochemistry 
and Food Technology (IATA-CSIC), 46980, Paterna, Valencia, Spain.
(5)Center for Innovative Care and Health Technology (ciTechCare), School of 
Health Sciences, Polytechnic of Leiria, 2410-541, Leiria, Portugal. 
sonia.pereira@ipleiria.pt.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder triggered by dietary gluten 
in genetically predisposed individuals that primarily affects the small 
intestine. Studies have reported differentially abundant bacterial taxa in the 
gut microbiota of celiac patients compared with non-celiac controls. However, 
findings across studies have inconsistencies and no microbial signature of 
celiac disease has been defined so far.
RESULTS: Here, we showed, by comparing celiac patients with their non-celiac 
1st-degree relatives, that bacterial communities of related individuals have 
similar species occurrence and abundance compared with non-relatives, regardless 
the disease status. We also found in celiac patients a loss of bacterial species 
associated with fiber degradation, and host metabolic and immune modulation, as 
ruminiclostridia, ruminococci, Prevotella, and Akkermansia muciniphila species. 
We demonstrated that the differential abundance of bacterial species correlates 
to different dietary patterns observed between the two groups. For instance, 
Ruminiclostridium siraeum, Ruminococcus bicirculans, and Bacteroides plebeious, 
recognized as fiber-degraders, appear more abundant in non-celiac 1st-degree 
relatives, which have a vegetable consumption pattern higher than celiac 
patients. Pattern of servings per day also suggests a possible link between 
these species' abundance and daily calorie intake.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we evidenced that a kinship approach could be valuable in 
unveiling potential celiac disease microbial traits, as well as the significance 
of dietary factors in shaping microbial profiles and their influence on disease 
development and progression. Our results pave the way for designing and adopting 
novel dietary strategies based on gluten-free fiber-enriched ingredients to 
improve disease management and patients' quality of life.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13099-024-00643-7
PMCID: PMC11459851
PMID: 39375796

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. J Dairy Sci. 2024 Oct 4:S0022-0302(24)01199-8. doi: 10.3168/jds.2024-25455. 
Online ahead of print.

Exploring the Gut Microbiota Landscape in Cow Milk Protein Allergy: Clinical 
Insights and Diagnostic Implications in Pediatric Patients.

Xu J(1), Sheikh TMM(2), Shafiq M(3), Khan MN(2), Wang M(2), Guo X(2), Yao F(2), 
Xie Q(2), Yang Z(4), Khalid A(5), Jiao X(6).

Author information:
(1)Precision Medical Lab Center, Chaozhou Central Hospital Affiliated to 
Southern Medical University, Chaozhou, China; Department of Cell Biology and 
Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, 515041, China.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, 515041, China.
(3)Research Institute of Clinical Pharmacy, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, 515041, China.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Chaozhou Central Hospital Affiliated to Southern 
Medical University, Chaozhou, China.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Federal Medical College, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(6)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Shantou University Medical College, 
Shantou, 515041, China. Electronic address: xyjiao@stu.edu.cn.

Cow milk protein allergy (CMPA) is a significant health concern characterized by 
adverse immune reactions to cow milk proteins. Biomarkers for the accurate 
diagnosis and prognosis of CMPA are lacking. This study analyzed the clinical 
features of CMPA, and 16S RNA sequencing was used to investigate potential 
biomarkers through fecal microbiota profiling. Children with CMPA exhibit a 
range of clinical symptoms, including gastrointestinal (83% of patients), skin 
(53% of patients), and respiratory manifestations (26% of patients), 
highlighting the complexity of this condition. Laboratory analysis revealed 
significant differences in red cell distribution width (RDW) and inflammatory 
markers between the CMPA and control groups, suggesting immune activation and 
inflammatory responses in CMPA. Microbial diversity analysis revealed higher 
specific diversity indices in the CMPA group compared with those in control 
group, with significant differences at the genus and species levels. Bacteroides 
were more abundant in the CMPA group, whereas Bifidobacterium, Ruminococcus, 
Faecalibacterium, and Parabacteroides were less abundant. The control group 
exhibited a balanced microbial profile, with a predominant presence of 
Bifidobacterium bifidum and Akkermansia muciniphila. The significant abundance 
of Bifidobacterium in the control group (23.19% vs 9.89% in CMPA) was associated 
with improved growth metrics such as height and weight, suggesting its potential 
as a probiotic to prevent CMPA and enhance gut health. Correlation analysis 
linked specific microbial taxa such as Coprococcus and Bifidobacterium to 
clinical parameters such as family allergy history, weight and height, providing 
insights into CMPA pathogenesis. Significant differences in bacterial abundance 
suggested diagnostic potential, with a panel of 6 bacteria achieving high 
predictive accuracy (area under curve (AUC) = 0.8708). This study emphasizes the 
complex relationship between the gut microbiota and CMPA, offering valuable 
insights into disease mechanisms and diagnostic strategies.

© 2024, The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of the American Dairy 
Science Association®. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

DOI: 10.3168/jds.2024-25455
PMID: 39369895

1. J Hazard Mater. 2024 Dec 5;480:135999. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.135999.
Epub  2024 Oct 1.

Inhalation of 2,2',5,5'-tetrachlorobiphenyl (PCB52) causes changes to the gut 
microbiome throughout the gastrointestinal tract.

Dean LE(1), Wang H(2), Bullert AJ(3), Wang H(4), Adamcakova-Dodd A(5), Mangalam 
AK(6), Thorne PS(7), Ankrum JA(8), Klingelhutz AJ(9), Lehmler HJ(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States. Electronic address: laura-gosse@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States. Electronic address: hui-wang-2@uiowa.edu.
(3)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Neuroscience, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address: 
amanda-bullert@uiowa.edu.
(4)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States. Electronic address: hui-wang-1@uiowa.edu.
(5)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States. Electronic address: andrea-a-dodd@uiowa.edu.
(6)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. 
Electronic address: ashutosh-mangalam@uiowa.edu.
(7)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, United States; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Neuroscience, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic address: 
peter-thorne@uiowa.edu.
(8)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
United States. Electronic address: james-ankrum@uiowa.edu.
(9)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
United States. Electronic address: al-klingelhutz@uiowa.edu.
(10)Department of Occupational and Environmental Health, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA, United States; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in 
Neuroscience, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States. Electronic 
address: hans-joachim-lehmler@uiowa.edu.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), such as PCB52, are hazardous environmental 
contaminants present in indoor and outdoor environments. Oral PCB exposure 
affects the colon microbiome; however, it is unknown if inhalation of PCBs 
alters the intestinal microbiome. We hypothesize that sub-acute inhalation of 
PCB52 affects microbial communities depending on the location in the (GI) 
gastrointestinal tract and the local profiles of PCB52 and its metabolites 
present in the GI tract following mucociliary clearance and biliary or 
intestinal excretion. Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed via nose-only inhalation 
4 h per day, 7 days per week, for 4 weeks to either filtered air or PCB52. After 
28 days, differences in the microbiome and levels of PCB52 and its metabolites 
were characterized throughout the GI tract. PCB52 inhalation altered taxa 
abundances and predicted functions altered throughout the gut, with most 
alterations occurring in the large intestine. PCB52 and metabolite levels varied 
across the GI tract, resulting in differing PCB × microbiome networks. Thus, the 
presence of different levels of PCB52 and its metabolites in different parts of 
the GI tract has varying effects on the composition and predicted function of 
microbial communities. Future studies need to investigate whether these changes 
lead to adverse outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2024.135999
PMCID: PMC11608156
PMID: 39369679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Author AM is the inventor of a 
technology claiming the use of Prevotella histicola for the treatment of 
autoimmune diseases. The patent for the technology is owned by Mayo Clinic, 
which has given an exclusive license to Evelo Biosciences. AM received royalties 
from Mayo Clinic (paid by Evelo Biosciences). However, no funds or products from 
the patent were used in the present study. The remaining authors declare that 
the research was conducted without any commercial or financial relationships 
that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

1. Pathol Res Pract. 2024 Nov;263:155603. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2024.155603. Epub
2024  Sep 28.

Exploring the gut microbiome and head and neck cancer interplay.

Shetty VV(1), Shetty SS(2).

Author information:
(1)Nitte (Deemed To Be University), KS Hegde Medical Academy (KSHEMA), Central 
Research Laboratory, Cellomics, Lipidomics and Molecular Genetics 
Division, India.
(2)Nitte (Deemed To Be University), KS Hegde Medical Academy (KSHEMA), Central 
Research Laboratory, Cellomics, Lipidomics and Molecular Genetics 
Division, India. Electronic address: shilpajshetty@nitte.edu.in.

The gut microbiome, a complex community of microorganisms residing in the 
gastrointestinal tract, plays a crucial role in maintaining human health and 
influencing disease outcomes. Recent advancements in sequencing technologies 
have revealed the intricate relationship between gut microbiota and various 
health conditions. This review explores the impact of gut microbiome dysbiosis 
on immune function, chronic inflammation, and cancer progression. Dysbiosis, 
characterized by an imbalance in microbial populations, can lead to immune 
dysfunction, creating a pro-inflammatory environment conducive to tumorigenesis. 
Gut microbiome metabolites, such as short-chain fatty acids and bile acids, also 
play a significant role in modulating these processes. The interplay between 
these factors contributes to the development and progression of HNC. 
Furthermore, this review highlights the potential of therapeutic interventions 
targeting the gut microbiome, including probiotics, prebiotics, and dietary 
modifications, to restore microbial balance and mitigate cancer risk. 
Understanding the mechanisms by which the gut microbiome influences HNC can 
provide valuable insights into novel preventive and therapeutic strategies. 
Future research should focus on elucidating the specific microbial taxa and 
metabolites involved in HNC, as well as the impact of lifestyle factors such as 
diet, alcohol consumption, and oral hygiene on the gut microbiome. By leveraging 
the growing knowledge of the gut microbiome, it may be possible to develop 
personalized approaches to cancer prevention and treatment, ultimately improving 
patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2024.155603
PMID: 39368364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.

1. Mol Oral Microbiol. 2024 Oct 1. doi: 10.1111/omi.12485. Online ahead of print.

Salivary microbiome and biomarker characteristics of diabetics with 
periodontitis.

Ebersole JL(1), Kirakodu SS(2), Zhang X(3), Dawson D 3rd(2)(4), Miller CS(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Dental Medicine, University of 
Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA.
(2)Center for Oral Health Research, College of Dentistry, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(3)Department of Statistics, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
(4)Department of Oral Health Practice, Center for Oral Health Research, of 
Dentistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the characteristics of the salivary microbiome in Type 2 
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) patients with or without periodontitis.
BACKGROUND: Periodontitis has been identified as clear sequelae of T2DM. This 
chronic oral disease also impacts the management of the clinical features of 
diabetes. The oral microbiome characteristics in T2DM with and without 
periodontitis, as well as the response of this oral microbiome to nonsurgical 
therapy have not been well described. Knowledge of key oral biological features 
could help address the observed poorer clinical presentation of T2DM patients.
METHODS: The oral microbiome in saliva of adult cohorts periodontally 
healthy/non-diabetic (non-periodontitis; NP; n = 31), T2DM without periodontitis 
(DWoP; n = 32), and T2DM with periodontitis (DWP; n = 29) were characterized by 
microbial molecular analysis using V3-V4 sequencing and Luminex or ELISA 
techniques for salivary host analytes.
RESULTS: Phyla distribution showed DWP with significantly lower levels of 
Firmicutes and Actinobacteria and higher levels of Fusobacteria and Spirochetes 
compared to the healthier groups. Approximately 10% of the detected microbial 
species showed significant differences in frequency and level of colonization 
among the DWP, DWoP, and NP samples. A subset of bacteria were significantly 
correlated with clinical disease features, as well as a specific repertoire of 
salivary analytes, in particular matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)8/MMP9, 
interleukin-1ß, B-cell activating factor, and resistin differed between the 
groups and were related to specific taxa. Principal component analysis that 
identified a majority of the DWP subjects microbiome was unique based upon an 
array of 27 taxa out of up to 255 detected in the saliva samples.
CONCLUSION: T2DM patients with periodontitis show unique oral microbiome and 
salivary analyte composition compared to diabetics or non-diabetic persons 
without periodontitis. Specific members of the oral microbiome relate directly 
to the clinical disease features and/or salivary biomolecules in T2DM 
individuals.

© 2024 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/omi.12485
PMID: 39351619

1. Microbiome. 2024 Sep 30;12(1):186. doi: 10.1186/s40168-024-01897-8.

Stratification of human gut microbiomes by succinotype is associated with 
inflammatory bowel disease status.

Anthamatten L(1)(2), von Bieberstein PR(1), Menzi C(1), Zünd JN(2), Lacroix 
C(2), de Wouters T(3), Leventhal GE(4).

Author information:
(1)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Food Biotechnology, Institute of Food, Nutrition and Health, 
ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland. t.dewouters@pharmabiome.com.
(4)PharmaBiome AG, Schlieren, Switzerland. g.leventhal@pharmabiome.com.

BACKGROUND: The human gut microbiome produces and consumes a variety of 
compounds that interact with the host and impact health. Succinate is of 
particular interest as it intersects with both host and microbiome metabolism. 
However, which gut bacteria are most responsible for the consumption of 
intestinal succinate is poorly understood.
RESULTS: We build upon an enrichment-based whole fecal sample culturing approach 
and identify two main bacterial taxa that are responsible for succinate 
consumption in the human intestinal microbiome, Phascolarctobacterium and 
Dialister. These two taxa have the hallmark of a functional guild and are 
strongly mutual exclusive across 21,459 fecal samples in 94 cohorts and can thus 
be used to assign a robust "succinotype" to an individual. We show that they 
differ with respect to their rate of succinate consumption in vitro and that 
this is associated with higher concentrations of fecal succinate. Finally, 
individuals suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) are more likely to 
have the Dialister succinotype compared to healthy subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified that only two bacterial genera are the key succinate 
consumers in human gut microbiome, despite the fact that many more intestinal 
bacteria encode for the succinate pathway. This highlights the importance of 
phenotypic assays in functionally profiling intestinal microbiota. A 
stratification based on "succinotype" is to our knowledge the first 
function-based classification of human intestinal microbiota. The association of 
succinotype with IBD thus builds a bridge between microbiome function and IBD 
pathophysiology related to succinate homeostasis. Video Abstract.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40168-024-01897-8
PMCID: PMC11441152
PMID: 39350289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.A., P.R.v.B., C.M., T.d.W., and G.E.L. are or 
were employees of PharmaBiome. T.d.W. and C.L. are founders of PharmaBiome. L.A. 
is a co-founder of PharmaBiome. L.A., P.R.v.B., T.d.W., and G.E.L. are inventors 
on the patent application WO 2022/023458 A1 entitled “Microbial Niche Mapping” 
and on the patent application WO 2023/118460 A1 entitled “New biomarker for 
disorders and diseases associated with intestinal dysbiosis”. PharmaBiome 
provided financial support.