1. Bioinformatics. 2024 Jan 2;40(1):btad771. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad771.

Mining literature and pathway data to explore the relations of ketamine with 
neurotransmitters and gut microbiota using a knowledge-graph.

Liu T(1)(2), Feenstra KA(1), Huang Z(2), Heringa J(1).

Author information:
(1)Integrative Bioinformatics, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1081 HV, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Learning & Reasoning Group, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1081 HV, 
The Netherlands.

MOTIVATION: Up-to-date pathway knowledge is usually presented in scientific 
publications for human reading, making it difficult to utilize these resources 
for semantic integration and computational analysis of biological pathways. We 
here present an approach to mining knowledge graphs by combining manual curation 
with automated named entity recognition and automated relation extraction. This 
approach allows us to study pathway-related questions in detail, which we here 
show using the ketamine pathway, aiming to help improve understanding of the 
role of gut microbiota in the antidepressant effects of ketamine.
RESULTS: The thus devised ketamine pathway 'KetPath' knowledge graph comprises 
five parts: (i) manually curated pathway facts from images; (ii) recognized 
named entities in biomedical texts; (iii) identified relations between named 
entities; (iv) our previously constructed microbiota and pre-/probiotics 
knowledge bases; and (v) multiple community-accepted public databases. We first 
assessed the performance of automated extraction of relations between named 
entities using the specially designed state-of-the-art tool BioKetBERT. The 
query results show that we can retrieve drug actions, pathway relations, 
co-occurring entities, and their relations. These results uncover several 
biological findings, such as various gut microbes leading to increased 
expression of BDNF, which may contribute to the sustained antidepressant effects 
of ketamine. We envision that the methods and findings from this research will 
aid researchers who wish to integrate and query data and knowledge from multiple 
biomedical databases and literature simultaneously.
AVAILABILITY AND IMPLEMENTATION: Data and query protocols are available in the 
KetPath repository at https://dx.doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8398941 and 
https://github.com/tingcosmos/KetPath.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btad771
PMCID: PMC10769815
PMID: 38147362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.

1. Artif Intell Med. 2023 Nov;145:102677. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2023.102677. Epub
 2023 Oct 5.

Food4healthKG: Knowledge graphs for food recommendations based on gut microbiota 
and mental health.

Fu C(1), Huang Z(2), van Harmelen F(3), He T(4), Jiang X(5).

Author information:
(1)National Engineering Research Center for E-Learning, Central China Normal 
University, Wuhan, China; School of Computer Science, Central China Normal 
University, Wuhan, China; Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; National Language Resources Monitor 
Research Center for Network Media, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, 
China.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands; Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders, Shanghai Pudong New 
Area Mental Health Center, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China; Deep Blue Technology Group, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Computer Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)School of Computer Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China; 
National Language Resources Monitor Research Center for Network Media, Central 
China Normal University, Wuhan, China.
(5)School of Computer Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China; 
National Language Resources Monitor Research Center for Network Media, Central 
China Normal University, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: 
xpjiang@mail.ccnu.edu.cn.

Food is increasingly acknowledged as a powerful means to promote and maintain 
mental health. The introduction of the gut-brain axis has been instrumental in 
understanding the impact of food on mental health. It is widely reported that 
food can significantly influence gut microbiota metabolism, thereby playing a 
pivotal role in maintaining mental health. However, the vast amount of 
heterogeneous data published in recent research lacks systematic integration and 
application development. To remedy this, we construct a comprehensive knowledge 
graph, named Food4healthKG, focusing on food, gut microbiota, and mental 
diseases. The constructed workflow includes the integration of numerous 
heterogeneous data, entity linking to a normalized format, and the well-designed 
representation of the acquired knowledge. To illustrate the availability of 
Food4healthKG, we design two case studies: the knowledge query and the food 
recommendation based on Food4healthKG. Furthermore, we propose two evaluation 
methods to validate the quality of the results obtained from Food4healthKG. The 
results demonstrate the system's effectiveness in practical applications, 
particularly in providing convincing food recommendations based on gut 
microbiota and mental health. Food4healthKG is accessible at 
https://github.com/ccszbd/Food4healthKG.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2023.102677
PMID: 37925207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or 
organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no 
professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, 
service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position 
presented in, or the review of, the manuscript.